Ministry of Justice
Administrative Council for Economic Defense
GUIDELINES FOR COMPETITION COMPLIANCE PROGRAMS
CADE’s Office Presidency
SEPN 515 Conjunto D, Lote 4, Ed. Carlos Taurisano
Zip: 70770-504 – Brasília/DF
www.cade.gov.brCoordination:
Vinicius Marques de Carvalho
Eduardo Frade Rodrigues
Editing:
Ana Carolina Lopes de Carvalho
Marcela Mattiuzzo
Revision:
Alexandre Cordeiro Macedo
Cristiane Alkmin Junqueira Schmidt
Gilvandro Vasconcelos Coelho de Araujo
João Paulo Resende
Márcio de Oliveira Júnior
Paulo Burnier da Silveira
In-house contributors:
Diogo Thomson de Andrade
Luiza Kharmandayan
Victor Santos Rufino
External contributors:
Cristianne Saccab Zarzur
Marcio C. S. Bueno
Maria Eugênia Novis
Pedro Mariani
Graphic planning:
Public Relations UnitINDEX
1. Introduction ................................................................................................... 6
1.1 The Role of the Administrative Council for Economic Defense .................................... 7
1.2 Practices within the scope of these Guidelines ......................................................... 7
1.2.1 Incentives for compliance with Competition Law ............................................................. 7
2. Compliance..................................................................................................... 9
2.1 What is Compliance ............................................................................................... 9
2.2.1 Integration of several areas in compliance programs ....................................................... 9
2.2 Who can benefit from Compliance ........................................................................ 10
2.3 Benefits of the Compliance program to companies ................................................. 11
2.3.1 Risk prevention ............................................................................................................. 11
2.3.2 Anticipated identification of problems ........................................................................... 12
2.3.3 Identification of infringements by other companies ........................................................ 12
2.3.4 Reputational benefit ..................................................................................................... 13
2.3.5 Employee awareness .................................................................................................... 13
2.3.6 Reduction of costs and contingencies ............................................................................ 14
3. Competition Compliance ............................................................................... 14
3.1 What is competition compliance ........................................................................... 14
3.1.1 Limitations ................................................................................................................... 14
3.1.2 Sham programs ............................................................................................................ 15
3.2 Structuring Robust Programs ................................................................................ 15
3.2.1 General Criteria ............................................................................................................ 16
3.2.1.1 Commitment .......................................................................................................................... 16
3.2.1.2 Risk Analysis .......................................................................................................................... 16
3.2.1.3 Risk Mitigation ...................................................................................................................... 21
3.2.1.4 Reviewing the Program ......................................................................................................... 28
3.2.2 Particularities of Individual Circumstances ..................................................................... 28
3.2.2.1 Cartels ................................................................................................................................... 29
3.2.2.2 Bid Rigging ............................................................................................................................ 32
3.2.2.3 Associations, Trade Unions, and Standard Setting Organizations (SSOs) ............................... 33
3.2.2.4 Unilateral Conducts and Vertical Restraints ........................................................................... 34
3.3 Impact on Administrative Penalties ....................................................................... 383.3.1 The Leniency Program ................................................................................................... 39
3.3.2 Settlement Agreements ................................................................................................. 39
3.3.3 Consultations ............................................................................................................... 40
3.3.4 Sentencing ................................................................................................................... 41
4. Final Remarks ............................................................................................... 41I. Introduction
Law 12.529/2011 (Competition Law) established a new structure for the Brazilian
Competition Protection System (BCPS) in Brazil, of which the Administrative Council for
Economic Defense (CADE) is part, and set out its functioning and powers. This Law was a
milestone in the consolidation of Brazilian antitrust law, bringing about various innovations –
such as the launch of a new institutional design, more efficient in carrying out the authority’s
objectives – and reiterating the importance of fulfilling its provisions.
Due to this renewed focus, one subject that has gained space on the competition agenda
is compliance programs. Economic agents are becoming increasingly aware of the need to
implement practices that do not infringe the Competition Law and that demonstrate a
proactive attitude on the part of private entities. Due to these factors, the implementation of
Compliance programs has been multiplying.
The purpose of these Guidelines is to address this reality and to establish non-binding
directives for companies and other private entities regarding these programs, specifically in
the field of competition, such as what they consist of, how they can be implemented and what
the benefits of their adoption are. These are suggested guidelines (or a “menu” of options, to
use the terminology of the International Chamber of Commerce1), which can be accepted or
not based on the reality of each organization.
In that sense, CADE understands that medium and small-sized entities may implement
Compliance programs, albeit smaller in scope and with a reduced budget when compared
those of large companies.2
1 The International Chamber of Commerce is an international organization that developed one of the most
complete guides about compliance, and a reference in the subject in the international scenario. The material
is available on: http://www.iccwbo.org/Advocacy-Codes-and-Rules/Document-centre/2013/ICC-
Antitrust-Compliance-Toolkit/
2 SCCE – A Compliance & Ethics Program on a Dollar a Day: How Small Companies Can Have Effective
Programs. SCCE’s CEO, in the introduction of the guide developed by the society specifically for
compliance programs with reduced budgets states: “Of course you could, if you wanted to spend any
amount of money on compliance and ensure your efforts are expensive. Some have indeed created
expensive compliance programs. However, the idea that any company that wants a compliance program
must spend a lot of money is without merit. The claim that some companies – those that are small and
medium sized – are too small to implement a compliance program is not accurate. Anyone with any business
experience and who is being honest knows that any business operation can be managed efficiently or
inefficiently. Compliance is no different. You can implement an effective compliance program with a small
investment if you know what you are doing.”
61.1 The Role of the Administrative Council for Economic Defense
CADE’s role, as established by the law, is to ensure free competition. To achieve this
goal, CADE exercises its preventive functions (merger analysis and consultations), its repressive
functions (investigation and punishment of anticompetitive conducts), and educational
functions (raising awareness of the importance of maintaining a healthy competition
environment.)
The main focus of these guidelines are the practices subject to CADE’s repressive
functions. Compliance programs aims primarily at hindering companies, organizations, and
persons from violating the Competition Law, that is, at preventing them from adopting
practices that may constitute infractions to the economic order, thus subject to severe penalties
to be applied by CADE. Such practices may be (i) horizontal, put forward by agents that
compete among themselves; (ii) vertical, carried out by agents acting in different levels of the
same chain of production; or (iii) unilateral, practiced by agents with a dominant position.
I.2 Practices within the scope of these Guidelines
These guidelines will tackle anticompetitive practices, as the recommendations on good
practice in merger review were largely dealt with in the Guidelines on Gun Jumping. For further
explanations on the subject, the reading of the aforementioned Guidelines is recommended.
Here, the orientations will be directed at the creation of programs within private
organizations that can be effective to avoid practices that may be understood as collusive or
unilateral infringements of the competition law.
I.2.1 Incentives for compliance with Competition Law
Before entering into further detail regarding what is a Compliance program, what its
specific benefits and structure are, it is important to highlight the reason why economic agents,
be they large, medium or small, should be concerned with complying with the Competition
Law. There are two responses, the first related to liability derived from non-compliance, and a
second related to the benefits that compliance with the law brings to society and to economic
agents themselves.
7As described in Articles 37 and 38 of the Competition Law, private entities are subject
to severe sanctions following the finding of such infringements. Furthermore, companies may
be subject to prosecution in the civil sphere and individuals in the criminal sphere, by force of
Law 8.137/1990. Also, with CADE’s growing enforcement activity, which has been increasing
the number of investigations and judgments of administrative proceedings, the aim is to
minimize the incentives for companies to engage in infringements. Some of the applicable
sanctions are:
 Companies: penalties of 0,1% until 20% from the amount of the gross income
in the branch of corporate activity in which the infringement took place;
 Administrator (directly or indirectly) responsible for the infringement, when her
liability is confirmed: penalty of 1% until 20% from that inflicted on the
company;
 Persons (employees, consultants, accountants, etc.) or Entities (public or
private/associations/with or without the character of a legal entity, even if
temporarily constituted) that do not exercise corporate activities: penalties of R$
50,000 until R$ 2,000,000,000;
 Repeated infringement:
o Company or persons: the penalties will be imposed in double;
o Continuity of the acts or practices that constitute an infringement to the
economic order, after final judgment by the Tribunal determining its
discontinuance: daily penalties fixed in a minimum of R$ 5,000, going
up to 50 times that amount, if so recommends the offender’s economic
standing and the gravity of the infringement;
 Criminal Proceeding: the persons involved in anticompetitive conducts can also
be criminally charged and punished in penalties amounting to 2 till 5 years of
imprisonment plus pecuniary charges.
Notwithstanding, there are other benefits that derive from complying with competition
law besides avoiding sanctions. The most elementary of them is the guarantee of a fair
competition environment. One other benefit is the good reputation of companies in the market
and their good standing in public opinion, as will be shown in more detail in item 2.3. As
society becomes increasingly aware of the importance of healthy competition, and news on
8anticompetitive practices gain space in the media, the incentives to cooperate with authorities
and to systematically comply with the law goes beyond merely not being subjected to the
applicable sanctions and extends to the guarantee of a good image.
2. Compliance
2.1 What is Compliance
Compliance is a set of internal measures, adopted by a given economic agent, which
enables it to prevent or minimize the risks of competition law infringements derived from its
activities and from the practices of its partners and employees.
Through compliance programs, economic agents reinforce their commitment with the
specific values and goals put forward in the program, and, primarily, their commitment to
complying with the law. This goal is ambitious and, consequently, requires not only the
development of a set of procedures, but (and especially) a change in the corporate culture. A
compliance program will have positive results when it manages to raise awareness among the
organization’s employees on the importance of doing the right thing.
Since such employees may present different motivations and degrees of tolerance to
risks, the purpose of the program is to implement common values and goals, ensuring they
are permanently observed. Compliance programs can encompass many similar areas related
to the economic agent’s activities, such as corruption, governance, fiscal or environmental
matters, and competition, among others, in an independent or aggregated manner.
2.1.1 Integration of several areas in compliance programs
A compliance program will rarely focus on the normative diplomas pertaining solely to
one area or sector, or address only one type of concern. The most common is for programs to
tackle several aspects and legal concerns simultaneously. For that reason, each economic agent
must take into account its own characteristics when implementing a compliance program. In
cases in which compliance risks touch several areas, greater effectiveness will be guaranteed
as far as competition compliance is developed and implemented not on its own, but as part of
a wider and broader program of corporate integrity and ethics.
9The broader strategy must be to incorporate compliance into the company’s business
culture so that it would not be possible to separate its commitment to compliance with law
from its internal rules. From this point, the program will be less exposed to the risk of being
seen as an obstacle to the achievement of performance goals and will be considered and
integrated as part of the fundamental rules of the business.
To exemplify a compliance relevant area other than competition, but that can be
integrated to competition compliance, it is worth mentioning anticorruption compliance, which
in Brazil is explicitly addressed in Law 12.846/2013.
This integration is important for two main reasons: (i) the establishment by the economic
agent of a program composed of internal mechanisms and processes aimed at detecting and
avoiding risks in several areas, including competition, may be more efficient and effective than
the creation of a single structure developed only for competition compliance, and (ii) if the
main objective of compliance is to create a culture of respect for the law, it is evident that the
fulfillment of all laws must be aimed for, not only the compliance with one legislative
instrument.
Notwithstanding, though competition ethics is part of a broader compliance agenda, it
is vital to adopt competition specific material that takes into consideration the specificities of
the law and policies for competition defense, as well as the adequate flow of resources to the
competition area, especially in those cases in which the exposure to Competition Law is high.
In short, integration should be aimed for without losing the specific features required of the
fulfillment of each law.
2.2 Who can benefit from Compliance
Organizations of all sizes can benefit from a Compliance program. However, the risks
-especially in the field of competition - to which an organization is exposed vary according to
its size, position in the market, sector, objectives, etc. For this reason, there is no unique model
for a compliance program. Each program must respect the particularities of each industry. Also,
it should be constantly reviewed in order to include new risks that may eventually emerge,
such as the ones derived from a merger transaction, from the introduction of a new product in
the market or from the entry into a new geographic market with a history of competition
infringements.
10These Guidelines do not intend to exhaust the subject of competition Compliance
programs, but rather to point out common elements to programs considered robust, as well
as particularities of specific cases relevant to their structuring.
In addition to the organizations themselves, the adoption of Compliance programs
benefits third parties, among them investors, consumers and commercial partners, insofar as
it guarantees that markets will remain competitive, prevents infringements and its subsequent
damages from occurring, and avoids loss in the value of the company. Furthermore, to the
authorities, prevention is always preferable than repression as it represents a smaller cost to
society.
Generally speaking, society, the economy, and competition as a whole benefit from
compliance programs.
2.3 Benefits of the Compliance program to companies
As these guidelines focus on the implementation and strengthening of compliance
programs in private organizations, the benefits derived from them will be described in greater
detail.
2.3.1 Risk prevention
The adoption of Compliance programs helps in identifying, mitigating and remedying
the risks of infringing the law, as well as and its
adverse consequences. In addition to the
fines, the Brazilian Competition Law
Even if competition risks are more
provides several other sanctions for frequently associated with larger
infringements to the economic companies, small and medium-sized
companies, as well as other
order, such as the publication of the
organizations, can and should be
judgment decision in a newspaper
concerned with complying with
of wide circulation, the prohibition
Competition Law, and consider the
to enter into contracts with official implementation of Compliance
financial institutions and to programs.
participate in public tenders for a five-
year period, registration of the infringer
11in the National Consumer Defense Registry, recommendation of compulsory license of
intellectual property rights owned by the infringer, denial of payment by installment of federal
taxes and cancellation of tax incentives or public subsidies, the division of the company,
transfer of corporate control, sale of assets or partial suspension of activities, and prohibition
to carry out commercial operations on their own or as a representative of a legal entity for up
to 5 (five) years.
In addition to the financial damages and to the activities of the infringing
organizations, there is also the negative impact on the individuals involved, who may be
prevented from performing management activities in other companies and are subject to
criminal liability.
2.3.2 Anticipated identification of problems
The awareness that compliance programs raise of undesired conduct enables the
identification of competition law infringements more quickly, which favors a prompt response
by the company. Among the benefits derived from the fast identification of infringements is
the greater possibility to negotiate agreements with the authorities, including leniency
agreements, which may lead to a substantial reduction of sanctions and, in some cases,
criminal immunity for the individuals involved. The specific effect of anticipating the
identification of problems for purposes of enforcement of the Competition Law will be dealt
with in item 3.3.
2.3.3 Identification of infringements by other companies
The awareness raised by Compliance programs enable employees to identify signs that
other companies, such as competitors, suppliers, distributors or clients, may be infringing the
law. Such identification is relevant as the interaction with third parties infringing the law may
be harmful to the economic agent. In such cases, when analyzing the infringements, the
authority will be prone to see the organization in a less favorable light, especially depending
on the level of involvement of the parties.
A close relationship between organizations suggests a close alignment of commercial
activities. Thus, it is very important to be capable to act if an illicit action of a third party with
12whom there is an intense relationship is identified, so there will be no doubt about the good
faith of the company.
2.3.4 Reputational benefit
Affirmative actions to promote compliance with the law are an essential part of an
ethics culture in business, which results in benefits to the organizations’ reputation and to their
attractiveness for promotional objectives, for recruitment and retention of employees. These
actions tend to increase the satisfaction and commitment in the workplace and the feeling of
belonging and identification with the group. The commitment to complying with the law also
inspires trust in investors, commercial partners, clients and consumers that value companies
that operate in an ethical way, and that would feel deceived in case of an infringement.
Infringements of the law lead to the questioning of the entity’s ethics and business
model. The possible economic impact derived from the damage to reputation - enhanced by
media coverage - may be larger than the damage resulting from the sanction, as it may lead
to losses that are not only financial, but also of business opportunities. Organizations that have
implemented compliance programs are increasingly attractive as commercial partners and as
institutions in which to work.
2.3.5 Employee awareness
Employees aware of the “rules of the game” are in a better position to do business
without fear of infringing the law, and also less afraid to seek assistance if they identify
possible sensitive competition matters. Subjects related to competition frequently appear in
commercial negotiations; well-developed compliance programs enable employees to make
decisions with more confidence. The fear of infringing the law - especially when there is the
risk of criminal prosecution - may intimidate the employees and eventually discourage tougher
and perfectly legitimate competition.
132.3.6 Reduction of costs and contingencies
The adoption of a Compliance program can prevent organizations from incurring in
costs and contingencies due to investigations, fines, negative publicity, interruption of
activities, unenforceability of contracts or illegal provisions, compensations, prohibition of
access to public funds or of participating in public tenders, etc.
In addition to judicial and administrative expenses, investigations require the
allocation of human and financial resources that could be otherwise applied in the core activity
of the entity. Furthermore, in addition to the administrative proceeding, companies and
individuals may be liable on a civil and criminal basis for the infringement occurred.
Damages to reputation can be felt even before the outcome of the proceeding, merely
for being under investigation, reflecting in loss of clients, business opportunities, investments,
market value, etc.
3. Competition Compliance
An organization should adopt and renew a competition compliance program when it
identifies that it has potential risk under the Competition Law. That will be the case of most, if
not all, companies. Below, the difference between a competition compliance program and
programs pertaining to other areas (of Law) will be outlined.
3.1 What is competition compliance
The main difference regards the scope of the program: competition compliance is
aimed, first and foremost, at minimizing the risk of competition violations, and, secondly, in
offering mechanisms so the organization may readily detect and deal with anticompetitive
practices that were not avoided.
3.1.1 Limitations
The most elementary point about the functioning of a competition compliance program
is the understanding that its adoption does not guarantee competition violations will not take
14place. Actually, if the program functions correctly, the tendency is that no effects will be readily
visible. After all, the entire logic of compliance is to promote and preserve a healthy
competition environment, meaning the company should be able to carry on its daily routine.
On the other hand, the greatest advantage is visible when violations do in fact happen: the
program allows for quick identification and for the company to take adequate action.
3.1.2 Sham programs
A concern when it comes to compliance enforcement is the creation of sham programs,
structured solely to simulate commitment. The mere formal adoption of a program does not
mean that the organization is effectively concerned and committed to complying with the
Competition Law, or that the implemented program is in fact effective in attaining that goal.
Entities may adopt superficial compliance programs, - and/or programs without real
commitment to maintaining a healthy competitive environment, with the intention to make
use of the program as a mitigating factor in case of conviction. They may also create programs
that, from the outside, look extremely well structured, have been set up by specialists, and
may even result in high costs for the company, but nevertheless do not resonate with the
corporate culture and are, as such, systematically ignored by employees.
For those reasons, concrete measures should always be part of the implementation of
a program, so that the program is not determined to be a sham program. Some fundamental
elements regarding the structure of a robust competition compliance program will be
presented below.
3.2 Structuring Robust Programs
It is important to reiterate that competition compliance programs are always
dependent on the particular characteristics of the organizations implementing them.
Nonetheless, these programs must aim at incorporating general characteristics deemed
essential for its efficiency and robustness, which will be systematically set out in item 3.2.1.
The risks which follow from each company’s specific activities will be addressed in item 3.2.2.
153.2.1 General Criteria
Though it is possible to structure a competition compliance program in many ways,
the following characteristics are common to robust programs. It should be mentioned that
despite being common, in the sense that they should somehow be incorporated into the
program, they do not require identical incorporation, that is, it is possible to incorporate and
approach them in more than one way.
How to ensure
commitment?
3.2.1.1 Commitment
An alternative that some
An organization’s genuine commitment is
companies adopt in order to
ensure involvement of the
the basis for any successful program. Without
governing bodies in
seriousness and effective intention to conduct compliance initiatives is to
guarantee their impact on
business in an ethical manner, the program is
employee salaries, including
doomed. In practice, commitment is substantiated management.
Such alternative can be viable
through the following: tone from the top, specially when decentralization
is acute and keeping unified
adequate resources, and autonomy/independence
control over the company’s
for the Compliance Leader (CL). entire structure is not feasible.
Another persuasive incentive is
the media. Highlighting the
Tone from the top
damage to managers’ careers
following from antitrust
By “tone from the top” one should infer that
violations results in more
commitment.
compliance is a fundamental value in the corporate
culture, which is safeguarded by its inclusion on
the agenda of the company’s governing bodies or of the highest-level person responsible for
steering the business of the company and approving its financial statements. In including
compliance as a strategic priority, the governing bodies guarantee the very existence of the
program, that (i) communicates its relevance to all employees, (ii) ensures its inclusion in the
company budget, allowing for discussion on the need for additional resources, (iii) monitors
its development, through periodic updates from the Compliance Leader (or similar), and (iv)
sets goals, objectives, and methods for controlling the competition compliance program, which
must be followed in practice.
Such involvement by the governing bodies should also be visible in daily activities. It is
essential, in order for compliance programs to be an effective part of the corporate culture,
16that employees are not held to “bottom line” only financial standards, and that there is no
incentive or tolerance of illicit behavior that nonetheless brings positive results in the short-
term. The standard to be applied comes from the top, thus the need for the administration to
be serious about compliance rules.
When it comes to multinational companies, in which decentralization tends to be
prevalent and the number of individuals in managerial capacities high (marketing
management, sales management, regional management, national direction, etc.), establishing
a coherent tone that will ensure compliance rules are upheld is an even bigger challenge. For
that reason, it is common for companies to adopt Codes of Conduct, which tend to offer
general parameters for employees on a global scale. If that is the option, it is important for the
Code to somehow address competition law compliance themes, even if more specific antitrust
issues are omitted and conveyed at a later point.
Appropriate Resources
The resources designated for competition
Monitoring strategies for big
compliance programs should have as parameters
businesses
(i) the organizations’ particularities (size, market
where it runs its business, etc.) and (ii) how One of the possible monitoring strategies
compliance represents avoided costs in potential for compliance programs is the adoption
of periodic field research, by an external
investigations and convictions. Once properly
agent, with a view to understand the
implemented, the program represents a powerful
perception of employees that interact
defense against fines substantially larger than their
directly with the public or with third
implementation and maintenance costs, plus
parties that acquire goods and services.
reputational consequences. When it comes to
The goal of such field research is to verify
particularities, one should note a program will be
whether the main compliance rules are
ever less credible the bigger the gap between
uphold by the sales personnel.
available resources and perceived risks.
In that scenario, it is advisable that
companies intending to invest in building or
strengthening their compliance programs take into
consideration:
17(a) Whether the budget designated for structuring and maintaining the program is
sufficient;
(b) The relationship between the number of employees entirely or partially dedicated to
compliance, the company’s size and the competition risks to which it is exposed;
(c) The allocation of staff dedicated to compliance, so that they are able to act
independently, and effectively impact the decision-making process within the
firm; and
(d) If there are enough resources in order to hire and empower the compliance team.
It is essential to stress that appropriate funding does not mean all programs must be
expensive. Since compliance strongly depends on each company’s particular structure, there is
nothing stopping a firm from adopting a program with little expenditure – as mentioned
above, compliance should not be limited to huge corporations, which means it must be
possible for small and medium firms to develop programs suited for their needs. The aspect
that must be taken into consideration is adequacy: so long as resources are sufficient, they will
be deemed appropriate.
Autonomy and Independence
It is fundamental to nominate an individual or team of individuals to lead the compliance
activities. That person should occupy a position compatible with her responsibilities. In
addition to having deep knowledge in technical aspects relating to competition law, the CL
should be able to influence the organization’s decision-making processes, which is only
possible if that person occupies a position of relevance.
CADE recognizes that each entity has its own peculiarities and, for that reason, it is
entirely up them to adequately position the CL in their organizational structure. Nevertheless,
it is their responsibility to ensure them sufficient
autonomy and independence so they can, in an
“Appropriate resources” is
informed manner, adopt measures that may not
not a synonym for
be in line with convictions by top management.
“expensive programs”. They
The option selected by some companies
must be sufficient.
has been to establish a schedule of meetings
between the compliance team and the
18governing bodies (be that the Board of Directors and/or Executive Board, the specific
committees by them designated, such as the Auditing Committee or the Compliance
Committee, or even the company’s director) in order to discuss and deliberate on themes that
involve competition risks.
Big companies might decide to dedicate an entire division to compliance, thereby
creating a group of employees to deal with compliance. If the company is simultaneously active
in several countries or economic sectors, then the possibility of designating national and
regional compliance leaders should also be considered. However, if the company is small or
medium sized, such big teams may not be needed. Once again, the most important aspect
about compliance leadership is ensuring that the individual coordinating the program and
monitoring its implementation is sufficiently independent so that his or her decisions get to
the governing bodies and are effectively given due consideration.
3.2.1.2 Risk Analysis
Well-structured compliance programs are usually preceded and followed by a profound
risk analysis. Among other factors, risks generally vary owing to a company’s size, economic
sectors in which it runs its businesses, position occupied in the market, the reach of its
activities, the number of employees and the level of training such employees have received.
For example, a company that holds a 60% market share and operates in an environment of
extreme rivalry with its competitors is less subject to the risk of collusive practices than
companies that operate in homogeneous product markets, have similar cost structures and
interact frequently with competitors. In the first case, the greatest risks are related to unilateral
and vertical practices. In the latter, the greatest concern relates to the risks associated with
collusive behavior and exchange of sensitive information with competitors.
For that reason, it is extremely important for companies to undergo an individualized
analysis of the risks associated with their activities, to classify those risks and prioritize
compliance activities in those areas where the associated risk is the highest.
But, after all, what is risk analysis? According to the ICC, analyzing risks implies taking
into consideration the aforementioned external conditions to which a given company is subject
and analyzing these conditions based on two factors: the probability that hypothetical events
19become reality and the effect those events would have once they occur.3 There is no one
methodology for such analysis, but a well-renowned method is the one established by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) in the United
Kingdom, in place since 19924, and another relevant reference is the Global Compact Risk
Analysis Guide of the United Nations.
However, the most important is to clearly
How to introduce compliance
specify the criteria of any given
into an organization’s daily
routine? methodology.5
When it is self-evident that the
In big businesses, the mentioning
of the competition compliance
company is facing high risks, and that it
policy by the high administration
has a widespread organizational
at all meetings which gather
employees, as well as the structure, one option is to ask for the
propagation of videos about the
assistance of external specialists. These
program in the intranet, recorded
by the CEO and vice-presidents. In specialists can contribute not only with
smaller companies, the constant
their technical expertise and practical
reinforcement of the relevance of
knowledge, but also with an outside
the program for the success of the
endevors. perspective, not embedded in the
company’s routine, and/or subject to
internal pressures.
It is also advisable for risk analysis to not be solely based on perceptions from the
Compliance Team or on assessment of written documents. On the contrary, those responsible
for the program should deeply investigate how the organization’s activities are carried out. In
order to do so, one must know the details about the firm’s functioning to properly analyze
which areas are exposed to lower or higher risks. Some suggestions in that regard are: (i)
interviews with employees from different areas, who occupy different hierarchical levels; (ii)
visits to operational units and to the market; (iii) constant review of strategies and risk
3 ICC Toolkit, pp. 17-18.
4 Commitee of Sponsoring Organisations of the Treadway Commission – http://www.coso.org/IC.htm.
5 Once again, noting that the burden of proof of the program’s effectiveness falls on the company itself, it
is advisable to clarify the methodology adopted for risk calculation, in order to assist the company itself if
anticompetitive investigations are established and require the analysis of the compliance program, and to
demonstrate the company’s good faith, ensuring it did not seek to establish unclear mechanismsfor the
assessment of risk.
20assessment methodology; (iv) open communication channels with employees, especially those
exposed to greater competition risks, etc.
As a result of the risk analysis, the resources for the compliance program should be
adequately allocated, prioritizing areas and topics of greater risk.
3.2.1.3 Risk Mitigation
Once the potentially problematic areas have been identified in each particular case, the
following initiatives are alternatives aimed at mitigating the risks associated with
anticompetitive practices.
Training and Internal Communication
The training offered to employees is a proper way to transmit the rules and objectives
of the compliance program. It is also through training that employees understand the
fundamental role compliance plays in a company and are able to ask questions regarding
compliance processes, which usually results in greater commitment to the overall program.
The most effective training commonly adopts different strategies, depending on the
hierarchical position and the level of exposure to competition risks of those subject to it, and
takes place periodically. This is because, for the most part, employees who directly interact
with competitors or whose field of action is sales or marketing tend to be subject to higher risk
than those whose activities are concentrated in other areas.
Regarding the type of training, the two most frequent methods are on-site and online.
Both are relevant: on-site training, inasmuch as it allows employees to be face-to-face with
the Compliance Leader, enables greater freedom and flexibility so that employees may ask
questions and make comments; online training, on the
other hand, can strengthen messages already
High-level personnel
transmitted in person, as well as reach a larger number should be a part of training
directed at lower staff
of employees at a lower cost. In both instances, it is workers, in order to
demonstrate the
advisable for training to be carried out by experienced
administration’s
professionals, and that the employees who took part in commitment to the
program and the relevance
the training sessions are subject to some form of
of training itself.
21evaluation, in order to verify how much of the program was effectively absorbed by them,
thereby guaranteeing a minimum level of effectiveness.
What kind of training is the most appropriate? As a general rule, relying on online
training alone is not advisable. This mechanism is usually selected by big companies, which
have difficulties gathering all their employees in one place, at one time, to provide them with
explanations regarding compliance. As mentioned, the
electronic method is efficient in that sense. However, it is
desirable that employees have the opportunity to interact
Reinforcing employee
with the compliance team more directly, in order to gain
training, namely of those
confidence in the program and in the people responsible
involved in implementing
compliance, through for it, not only so they can effectively report anticompetitive
professional internships and practices, but also so they are aware there will be no
post-graduate programs in
retaliation regarding their complaints on anticompetitive
that area, not only in Brazil,
behavior, on the contrary, that coming forward with this
but also abroad.
information is the behavior expected of them.
This situation is all the more critical for new
employees, or employees who never had any contact with
competition compliance. The natural tendency is for them to have more doubts, questions and
be more insecure. Personal contact can be more effective in conveying the idea that it is safe
to raise concerns, thus the suggestion for on-site training. However, given that digital
mechanisms have evolved considerably over the past years, it is possible that the concerns
brought about by the interaction between employees and compliance team can also be
addressed by online training. Once more, the most important thing is to guarantee
effectiveness, as much as possible, regardless of which mechanism one chooses to adopt.
In addition to training, it is also important to provide constant communication about the
compliance rules through different forms of communication between the organization and its
employees, so these rules effectively become a part of the corporate culture. Some of these
methods include conferences, videos, pocket guides, pamphlets, e-mails, intranet sites, and
apps, which should include leadership involvement. Without prejudice to these initiatives, it is
also appropriate to include the main competition compliance rules in the company’s Code of
Conduct, when such a code exists, as well as in internal communications related to that
document. Thereby, the company transmits to all its employees the message that involvement
22in any practices that violate the Competition
Law will also be considered a violation to the
A well-known and common mechanism is the
Code, resulting in the disciplinary penalties
creation of a hotline (or equivalent), which allows
described therein. any employee to have direct and anonymous
In drafting written materials, be it a Code contact with the Compliance Leader. These hotlines
bring two sorts of benefits: (i) since they protect
of Conduct, guidelines or specific orientations
anonymity, they also ensure security and safety to
for compliance, a company should take into
employees, who consequently participate more
consideration the reality of its business. A toolkit
actively in the program, for they can report
or booklet, a code, guidelines and orientations misconduct not to their superiors, but to a team or
that adopt unreal objectives, describe situations a compliance person specialized in that task; (ii)
compliance with the rules is greatly incentivized,
in an idealized manner or present issues in a
because potential offenders are aware that any
way excessively distant from the daily routine of
given employee is a potential whistleblower.
the company usually fail to resonate with
employees – and, in some cases, that strategy
even results in adverse effects, since employees start questioning the validity of a program
that does not comprehend the reality experienced by them.
Equally relevant is the treatment given to compliance processes. It is important that
employees can report to the compliance team in case they have questions, and that the team
can contact all employees directly, in order to properly guide them. Communication should be
a two-way street and, for it to run smoothly, the ideal is for employees to be fully aware of
what the processes are and how they work, even when those processes are extremely simple.
23Monitoring
How to guarantee effective
The success of the compliance program is also
monitoring?
highly dependent on an organization’s capacity to
In big companies exposed to high
monitor implementation. In general, monitoring
competition risks, one option is
activities can be directed at two areas: (i) adequate resorting to periodical external
consultations with specialists who
functioning of processes and controls; and (ii)
will elaborate an opinion regarding
evaluation of effectiveness.
competition risks. That document is
In the first category, the monitoring is focused on prepared using internal and external
documents, market data, interviews
individual behavior, in order to verify if the processes
with employees in marketing and
are followed by employees. The goal is, for example, to sales, etc.
measure if the proposed percentage of employees
effectively underwent some type of training; if only
employees previously trained in competition compliance have represented the company; if
the approval processes for commercial measures have been followed; if the rules established
are in line with international better practices.
One way to reinforce that monitoring is by certifying training. Certification is the
assurance provided by employees themselves that they took part in sessions in which the
compliance program’s rules and processes were clearly set out and are, therefore, well aware
of the company policy in that regard, along with personal commitment to uphold such rules.
This certification is usually written, taking the form of a declaration.
In the second category, of greater complexity, the program’s effectiveness and efficiency
will be analyzed. There are many alternatives: the firm can hire an auditor to verify, for
instance, if the trained employees have in fact understood and internalized best practices and
are applying them in their day-to-day work. Depending on available budget, it is also possible
to hire periodic market research to be conducted by specialized personnel, who will interview
third parties (consultants, suppliers, distributors, sales agent) in order to ensure those acting
for the company have been acting according to the compliance program standards.
Communication channels between the company and its employees, as well as between
the company and third parties involved in its business, also play an important role in
monitoring compliance. It is indispensable to provide and disseminate the existence of such
channels. As for the form they may assume, one option is the aforementioned hotline – some
companies adopt models alternative to hotlines, such as apps – or simply an operation carried
24out by a single person, available to provide clarifications, be it by e-mail, person-to-person or
by phone.
Additionally, this channel should incorporate the possibility of receiving complaints and
reports from employees and third parties, in order to identify competition risks, always
ensuring anonymity and confidentiality of all information provided.
The input received, be it simple questions regarding the functioning of compliance or
reports on illicit behavior, must be handled appropriately. Firstly, it is essential that anonymity
is guaranteed. Special attention should be given in case the company opts for documenting
the complaints of employees. Secondly, all information made available by the entity about the
reporting system has to be extremely clear: it is not
advisable to present materials in only one language if
the firm is active in several countries, nor is it wise to
Reporting Channels
make the use of the channel too complex, in need of Companies that interact
constantly and intensely with
long and highly detailed training, etc. Those
sales personnel may adopt a
responsible for answering the calls (or answering the
monitoring strategy by
e-mails) must be prepared to do so and aware of how engaging its commercial
partners, instructing them in
to proceed if facing serious and potentially problematic
regard to the compliance
accusations. It is also advisable, in order to reinforce
program, clarifying the rules
the two-sidedness of communications and strengthen adopted by the company,
and opening up a reporting
the trust of employees, that the employee reporting to
channel to be used in case
the channel has the chance to anonymously follow up
infringements are detected.
on her request.
Lastly, it is extremely important that the
company has the ability to process all the complaints it receives, providing answers to
employees’ concerns (even if those answers are negative, in the sense that the Compliance
Team has come to the conclusion that the conduct is not an infringement, or in the sense that
the request is not properly related to compliance, rather to a different area within the company,
since it is not uncommon for the compliance area to receive information better suited to other
departments). To attain such a goal, internal investigation processes must be well delineated
and transparent.
Unaddressed complaints have two main effects, one of which is loss of confidence from
employees, which results in disuse of the communications channel. Another is the potential
25negative effect for the company in case of antitrust investigations. After all, if the channel
exists, employees do report to the company and the organization does not provide adequate
answers to those reports, the impression is that the firm neglects competition issues. For that
reason, resource allocation is once again fundamental: it must be sufficient to fulfill the goals
that the company intends to achieve. Implementing a vastly complex and expensive
communications channel might not be the best alternative if the company cannot properly deal
with all the information brought forward through it.
Documentation
Each of the initiatives related to competition
compliance must be properly documented by the
Compliance Committee
organization. Proper documentation allows for
A suggestion for the insertion of
continued evolution of the program, based on compliance and simultaneous
guarantee of effective autonomy
improvement on the commitments previously made
and monitoring is the
and shared among the areas. This, in turn, ensures reinforcement of the competition
compliance structure by means of
continuity of the rules and processes, regardless of the
a Committee linked to the Board
of Directors, composed of legal
changes made to the group of people involved in
and economic external experts,
implementation. with the task of monitoring the
development of the program.
Moreover, adequate documentation of
competition compliance activities can be of great value
in case the company is called to provide information
regarding its conduct before the competition authorities. As an example, if the company keeps
records of the solid and detailed orientation given to a specific individual regarding price
coordination among competitors, one could conclude, depending on the evidence available,
that the employee’s involvement in collusive conduct represents an individual failure. That is,
the case of one violator who failed to comply with corporate culture, not a coordinated effort
from the organization in disregard of the Competition Law. Consequently, the good faith of
the company could be presumed, diminishing the severity of fines and of the conduct itself.
26Internal discipline and incentives
Part of monitoring consists of applying penalties to employees that violate competition
compliance rules. Independently from investigations that may be pursued by the competition
authorities, having an internal mechanism for punishment is an important step in
strengthening the program in the eyes of employees and in promoting a corporate culture
which embraces competition as one of its pillars.
The penalties should be applied to all employees, regardless of hierarchical position. It
is also important that they are clearly outlined, public and in line with the legislation (not only
competition, but also labor law). Decision-making regarding who, when and how to punish
must go through a process of careful thought and consideration. It is advisable that the final
word is not delegated to one single individual, but rather to a group of individuals.
Alternatively, an appeal mechanism for individual decisions could be implemented.
In terms of what penalties should be attributed to which individuals, the ideal is for the
company to take into consideration the degree of involvement in the conduct, its severity, the
employee’s previous participation in compliance training, her cooperation with the
investigative proceedings and also her good faith, hence it can determine which factors
mitigate or aggravate the punishment.
Another careful analysis concerns the disclosure of information gathered, not only
internally (to the individual subjected to investigations and to the other employees), but also
externally. As competition violations might result in the signing of leniency agreements and
settlement agreements, data should not be disclosed prematurely, at a time when the
company knows about a violation but is unable to provide evidence that it did in fact take
place, nor too late, given that (i) other companies may contact the authorities in order to ensure
a marker for the “first place in line” and (ii) excessive delay may indicate to the authorities an
unwillingness to cooperate, and even an intention of never coming forward with the
information, which is extremely damaging to the program’s credibility.
273.2.1.4 Reviewing the Program
Another important characteristic is related to the compliance program’s ability to be
revised and adapted over time. Since compliance should be concerned with competition risks
for a given company and those risks are constantly being altered due to the market dynamic
activity, the program should be periodically revised.
Competition conditions may change following from the entry of new players in the
market, new acquisitions, new commercial activity implemented by the company, or even
elimination of barriers to entry. Therefore, CADE believes there is no ideal periodicity for
revision of the rules, although it does recommend that companies establish an agenda in order
to constantly evaluate the need for change connected to each particular company and
circumstance.
It is important for the governing bodies to be aware of the need for alterations through
time. As mentioned, the involvement of high-level employees is very meaningful in ensuring
the success of the program, thus it is equally important for them to be informed of topics the
compliance team has highlighted as in need of change. This kind of information can be
transmitted in many forms, depending on the company’s characteristics. If the budget
dedicated to compliance is substantial – which usually is the case in big companies – then an
option is to have a periodic report aimed at analyzing those activities. If, however, the budget
is not sufficient for such a measure, the reports may be simpler, shorter, but provided more
regularly in meetings with the Board.
Even if the analysis ends up concluding that changes are not strictly necessary at a given
moment, it is advisable for companies, especially those exposed to high competition risks, to
commit to perfecting their compliance programs. Constant contact with rules and guidelines
issued by national and international authorities, with those whose exposure to risks is the
highest and with external consultants are examples of practices that tend to produce positive
effects and help in elaborating new standards of excellence for the future.
3.2.2 Particularities of Individual Circumstances
When structuring competition compliance programs, besides the general criteria, it is
important to observe the specifics from each individual circumstance, that is, the particular
risks to be addressed by the organizations according to the market in which they carry out
28their activities. Those risks can be of very different natures, and the aim of these guidelines is
to highlight particularly relevant situations common to the competition environment and how
compliance programs may be structured to address such particular situations.
The goal of the following items, therefore, is to (i) stress specific circumstances that
create particular competition risks and (ii) suggest parameters for structuring a compliance
program in case the company entered into one of these sensitive markets.
3.2.2.1 Cartels
Cartels are the most well-known, most discussed and certainly most punished
anticompetitive practices. They are also the main aim of leniency programs, responsible for the
larger part of authorities’ investigative activities not only in Brazil, but all over the world6.
Naturally, companies whose activities take place in markets where the risk of cartelization is
high should pay special attention to that conduct.
The illicit behavior is explicitly provided in Article 36, §3, II and III of the Brazilian
Competition Law and it consists of a collusion among competitors by way of manipulating the
market in order to (i) increase prices or hinder their adjustment, (ii) restrict the amount of
products in that market – that is, limit the offer, (iii) promote market division and (iv) coordinate
their activities in public biddings.
Cartels usually appear in oligopolistic markets, those controlled by a small number of
economic agents, since this conduct comes with high coordination costs. It is necessary to
monitor if all companies are following the terms of the agreement, to coordinate activities
between firms and, moreover, to create sufficient incentives to ensure none of the companies
will report the cartel to the authorities, which is all the more challenging the bigger the group.
Those costs will be lower the fewer companies are involved, for monitoring and coordination
become easier.
6 For more on the leniency program, see the Toolkit of the extinct Secretariat for Economic Law (SDE) at
http://www.cade.gov.br/upload/Cartilha%20Leniencia%20SDE_CADE.pdf (Portuguese only) and the
Leniency Guidelines at:
http://www.cade.gov.br/upload/Guidelines%20CADE's%20Antitrust%20Leniency%20Program.pdf
29The barriers to entry are also relevant in this analysis. After all, even when the market is
structured as an oligopoly, if a new agent can easily access it, it is much harder for the cartel
to maintain its controlling position. Homogeneity of goods and services also facilitates
collusion. When each company offers consumers a product with distinctive characteristics,
substitutability diminishes. Consequently, it is harder to promote an effective consumer market
division.
As such, all market characteristics that contribute in minimizing monitoring costs within
a cartel indicate that the costs for its creation are lower, although cartels have already been
identified in markets that did not meet these characteristics and that, theoretically, have higher
monitoring costs.
One point that deserves to be highlighted when discussing cartels and compliance
programs is the heightened emphasis these practices must receive in the training process,
since the conduct known as hardcore – that is, institutionalized cartels, with recurring and
durable interaction among competitors and where unlawfulness is well-determined, for there
is no possible efficiency running from the conduct that may mitigate anticompetitive effects –
frequently go unquestioned by authorities and have their illegality easily assimilated by
employees. That is not always the case for other types of infringements, because other
anticompetitive practices require more complex and controversial economic and legal analysis,
as will be seen below.
The tendency of authorities for condemnation in these cases is, therefore, stronger, since
besides the legal criteria that determine the unlawfulness of the cartel, any possible good faith
arguments that may demonstrate the conduct was a mishap and does not represent the
company’s corporate culture is much harder to make.
What should one do in such cases? How to create programs that address the problems
resulting from cartelization? Firstly, senior management’s involvement in the program is
extremely relevant in order to avoid cartel formation, for starting and maintaining an
infringement of this kind when the Board does not approve of it (or at least turns a deaf ear to
it) is tremendously challenging, considering that the decisions necessary in order to sustain
collusion are usually made by directors themselves.
30Secondly, because cartels usually develop in oligopolistic markets, in which the number
of competitors is significantly smaller, it is common for companies to constantly interact with
one another. CADE recommends, however, that competitors avoid contact between each other
and engage in direct exchange only in exceptional situations. In that sense, it is fundamental
for the training of those employees who somehow interact with competitors to be severely
strengthened, so they have precise knowledge of the information they are allowed to share
and the information they should keep secret.
In order to give some examples, here is an illustrative list of some practices that should
be avoided:
 Never share confidential or competitively sensitive information or data related
to the company's strategies with competitors;
 Do not discuss, negotiate, make agreements with competitors on prices or
promote market division and/or performance limits related to geographical area,
products and/or customers;
 When in a conference call with competitors, if the call somehow addresses
competitively sensitive information, refuse to discuss the matter and, if the other
counterpart insists on the subject, turn off the phone. Do the same even if
attending the call as a listener, and inform all attendees of your reason for
discontinuing the conversation. Request your withdrawal from the call to be
registered, along with your motivation for doing so;
 When in a meeting with competitors, if such meeting somehow addresses
competitively sensitive information, refuse to discuss the matter and, if the
counterpart insists on the topic, leave the room. Request your disallowance be
registered in the minutes of the meeting. Do the same even if attending the
meeting as a listener;
 Attend strictly necessary meetings where competitors will be present
accompanied by a company's lawyer. The lawyer will serve not only for
questions of clarification as to which topics may be addressed, but also to
inspect and certify their legality;
Immediately report to the Legal Department any improper conversation initiated
by a competitor or the disclosure of competitively sensitive information, by
31whatever means, undertaken by such competitor, for notice and possible further
actions by the Department.
3.2.2.2 Bid Rigging
Bid rigging involves cartel formation in the specific context of public procurement. It
deserves special attention for it presents particular characteristics as a result of the structure
of public procurement. These characteristics will be highlighted below, keeping in mind that
all that has been said about cartels in general in the previous item also applies to this item.
The goal is to answer (i) what in public procurement contributes to cartel formation and (ii)
how compliance programs can help companies address this risk.7
A first point to be raised is the publicity of public proceedings. Brazilian law requires
there to be a bid invitation, which leads to wide knowledge of the competition conditions for
the future contract. Furthermore, due to the nature of the proceedings, the identity of the
bidders is also public, meaning competitors are fully aware of those who take part in the bid,
facilitating collusion.
The second point relates to the recurrence of economic actors in bid proceedings.
Depending on the market in which a company operates, the number of firms qualified to take
part in procurements is relatively small (in some cases, very small, where only two or three
companies are able to compete). The interaction between those companies is therefore
constant, which, again, facilitates collusion. Also, the knowledge each company has of its
competitors’ modus operandi is considerable, making mirroring commercial practices all the
more likely.
Thirdly, the homogeneity of goods and services should once again be stressed. It
facilitates coordination in every cartel, but here it is taken to extremes due to the bid
proceeding itself. What the government aims to attain with a public offer is a specific good or
service, so it is evident there is close to full substitutability between what is offered by each
bidder.
7 The toolkit of the extinct SDE also provides information on big rigging and public tenders in competition
law. It can be found at: http://www.comprasnet.gov.br/banner/seguro/cartilha_licitacao.pdf (Portuguese
only.)
32Given those additional aspects, public procurement represents a focus of action for
authorities – not only competition authorities, since depending on the sort of coordination
between players, the Competition Law and Law 8.137/1990 (the economic crimes law) will
not be the only applicable statutes. As examples of other diplomas, Law 8.666/1993, in its
Article 93, determines that fraud, disturbance or hindrance in any act of the bid results in
detention from six months up to two years, combined with fines, and Law 12.846/2013, in
Article 5, IV, stipulates that fraud in the bid is an act harmful to the government and, as such,
subject to penalties.
Companies can avoid being exposed to this sort of conduct if they adopt specific training
for employees who actively participate in public proceedings, either by filling out the proposal
submission, or by attending meetings for proposal submissions. Another effective way to
prevent collusion is the detailed monitoring of every step taken during the bid, in order to offer
precise information about how the process was carried out, if questioned.
3.2.2.3 Associations, Trade Unions, and Standard Setting Organizations (SSOs)8
Associations, including trade unions, are ruled by the Brazilian Civil Code and play a
central role in society. It is through them that entire sectors and interest groups are able to
organize themselves and take pleas to the government, publicize their ideas and discuss their
common issues with other interested members of the community, aiming at finding solutions
for them.
Nevertheless, precisely because the interaction between agents grows substantially in
that context, associations also represent opportunities for collusion. For that reason, it is
important to pay special attention to what is discussed in association meetings, to avoid
having sensitive themes disclosed to competitors. SSOs, for their turn, are associations whose
goals are to establish quality standards and to expedite certificates ensuring companies follow
such standards. Inasmuch as they foster security and bring transparency to requirements for
goods and services, SSOs are beneficial to consumers and also to competition – they bring
down barriers to entry, for example. However, they may represent danger to the competitive
8 The extinct SDE issue a toolkit dealing specifically with associations and trade unions. Available at:
http://abpa-br.com.br/files/cartilha_sindicatos.pdf (Portuguese only.)
33process when they impose excessively restrictive standards or standards whose
implementation requires a disproportionate initial investment, for such measures might move
new entrants away and hamper innovation.
Therefore, the recommendations for companies which are part of associations, trade
unions, and SSOs are as follows:
 Never join associations whose goal is the coordination between competitors;
 Be careful when defining who will be the employees that will participate in
meetings directly, avoiding, when possible, these persons to be commercial
directors, sales managers, and other employees directly involved with the
commercial strategy of the organization;
 The employees should be instructed on what can and cannot be discussed with
competitors;
 Always and at all the times require for everything which took place during the
meeting to be properly registered in the minutes, and especially, when the
company believes a given topic to represent a competitive risk, it should
immediately withdraw from the meeting, having its withdraw registered;
 Examine the agenda prior to the meeting, refusing in advance to take part in
those in which the purpose of the meeting itself is to discuss competitively
sensitive issues;
 When attending meetings in which competitors are present, do not engage in
legally prohibited activities even if they are "officially approved" by the group
that is promoting the meeting or by others who are already participating in
them;
 Immediately contact the compliance team when facing any illegal activity in the
association;
Always review and approve the content to be formally issued by the association.
The recommendations for the associations, trade unions, and SSOs themselves, on the
other hand, are as follows:
 Be transparent about the agenda of the meetings, sending it in advance to the
members;
34 Disseminate the information collected from members in aggregated form, in
order to avoid the identification of individual data;
 Hire audit services to follow up on data collection activities (black box);
 Always give preference to requiring historical data. Whenever possible, provide
the data collected not only for members, but also to the public, even if only in
exchange of payment, in order to eliminate any suspicion about the legality of
the practice;
 Do not disclose current and future prices, costs, production levels, inventories,
marketing plans, expansion plans, the discount policies of members, or any
other competitively sensitive information pertaining to members;
 Request and receive competitively sensitive information from each individual
member respecting confidentially. Make the requests to neutral persons who are
not related to competitors, and never share such data with other members;
 Avoid to prepare and disclose tables, even non-binding ones, of prices and
commercial conditions under which goods and services shall be provided;
 Always use non-discriminatory criteria for admission of new members.
It is equally advisable for practices recurrently punished by competition authorities to be
avoided. One example in the case of associations is the expedition of price tables, which have
been considered anticompetitive by Cade in a number of administrative proceedings.
3.2.2.4 Unilateral Conducts and Vertical Restraints
Unilateral conduct and vertical restraints are a challenge to competition authorities
inasmuch as these types of anticompetitive practices are extremely varied, not always easy to
detect and generally incorporate a discussion about their effects – the company engaging in
the practice usually argues that it brings benefits to competition, despite also presenting risks.
That is precisely why compliance is so relevant in such cases.
These practices will be all the more of concern the more significant the market power of
the companies engaging in it. It is evident that a company with more power is also more
capable of unilaterally influencing the market in one direction or the other, as well as engaging
35in vertical concentrations of greater effects. Therefore, that is a relevant aspect of the analysis:
the player should ask itself if it occupies a dominant position and must be aware that, if the
answer is positive, it will be held to a higher standard when implementing commercial
strategies.
Unilateral conduct is not per se illicit. As a rule, practices will be deemed anticompetitive
once associated with the potential of excluding competitors or when they do not bring any
benefits to consumers. It is in this sense that CADE, in line with the top competition authorities
in the world, seeks to apply the so-called rule of reason in cases involving unilateral conduct.
The same holds true for vertical restraints, which can have positive effects for competition,
such as the reduction of transaction costs. However, depending on the market and the position
occupied by the agents involved, they may also implicate competitive risks.
As regards the structuring of robust compliance programs, it is important for companies
to create internal processes that, first and foremost, guarantee that commercial practices are
validated by the compliance team before coming into force. Such validation may take different
forms, but some aspects of an analysis that could be relevant within firms are the following:
1. Holding a dominant position. As mentioned above, the company should first analyze
whether it holds a dominant position in the market where it intends to implement a
given commercial practice. Having such a position is the most important element,
though not a sufficient one, in unilateral and vertical analysis. Other relevant aspects
include:
a) Competitors’ capacity to supply customers/clients who are the focus of the
commercial practice by means of substitute goods and services; as a rule, the
fewer competitors with those capacities, the greater the market power;
b) The market share of other players, that is, the overall degree of concentration
in the market;
c) The level of vertical concentration on the market and the share detained by the
particular economic agent;
d) The capacity of other firms to enter the market (including through importations
or transportation of products from other regions of the same country), or of
the companies already in the market to expand their production/offer; as a
rule, the harder any of those options are, the greater the market power;
36e) The remaining rivalry in the market, that is, if other players are fierce
competitors, to the point of being able to limit an eventual price increase; as
a rule, if other competitors have such capacity, the company’s market power
is not as excessive.
2. Possible effects of the exclusion of competitors. It is wise to take into consideration the
characteristics of the commercial practice in question in order to verify its potential
exclusionary effects, especially those concerning the closure of the market to
competitors due to excessive increase in the cost of rivals. These guidelines do not
intend to establish objective analysis criteria, but only to highlight that the commercial
practices of companies with a dominant position are all the less worrying:
a. The shorter their duration;
b. The lower the percentage of sales affected;
c. The easier the reproduction of such practices by equally efficient competitors;
d. The lower the potential anticompetitive effect.
3. Possible economic justification. The analysis of such unilateral practices and vertical
restraints can also take into consideration their economic benefits, that is, the
productive efficiency they represent (i.e., lower production costs), the protection of
investments needed in order to facilitate new goods and services, among other
aspects. The company may also analyze if there are possible economic justifications
for policy in question. As a rule, a practice will be all the more justifiable when:
a. The more necessary and proportional its restrictive aspect (exclusivity, loyalty
marketing, tie-in sales, etc.) to obtain the desired financial gains, especially
those related to protecting the investment that will make those benefits viable;
b. The bigger the benefits to end consumers, especially in terms of lower prices,
better goods and services and more innovation.
The last of the aforementioned criteria is extremely relevant, considering the competition
rules do not intend to protect one competitor or another, but rather the competitive process
as a whole, so that the dispute between economic agents benefits consumers. In that sense,
most of CADE’s precedents regarding unilateral conduct and vertical restraints understood
37there to be an infringement if either direct or indirect damages to consumers are observed, in
terms of higher prices, lower quality or less innovation.
In light of the complexity of the factors involved in the analysis of these practices, it is
advisable that compliance programs adopt some sort of prior evaluation of unilateral and
vertical practices which companies intend to implement. Even if, in case of investigations, the
analysis of competition authorities may differ from the one carried out by the company, it is
important that the firm is able to demonstrate it submits each practice to an approval process,
based on economic and legal parameters.
3.3 Impact on Administrative Penalties
Though initiatives in implementing compliance programs are increasingly seen as a way
to foster good corporate governance, as they are a reliable tool in spreading the “culture of
compliance” in the business community and also in promoting consumer welfare, the mere
existence of compliance programs is not sufficient to hinder the application of administrative
penalties, which include potentially substantial fines.
The hope, in fact, is that adopting a robust program prevents the company and its
employees from engaging in commercial practices that may constitute infringements to the
economic order. In other words, a well-adjusted program will maintain the status quo, when
the company is already engaged in corporate culture that fosters compliance with the law, or
modifies the internal configuration in order to promote this kind of culture. Nonetheless,
adopting programs can have very positive impacts for organizations and employees
investigated by CADE, be it in the context of single-firm or collusive conduct, even when those
organizations cannot completely avoid infringements.
As seen in practice, the adoption of compliance programs is positive inasmuch as it helps
to identify potential problems and provides a tool for rapidly solving them. In these terms,
there are four potential main effects of compliance programs for companies, namely the
subscription to the leniency program, the signing of settlement agreements, the submission of
consultations to the Tribunal and the effects in sentencing.
383.3.1 The Leniency Program
Adopting a compliance program is an important tool in identifying competition
violations and in carrying out the necessary measures to defend the interests of both the
organization and its employees.
The first step after identifying violations is the possibility of applying for the Leniency
Program. Such program allows for organizations and individuals that took part in a cartel or
other concerted anticompetitive practice to report it to CADE and cooperate with
investigations, in exchange for immunity in the administrative and criminal spheres, or
reduction from one to two thirds of applicable penalties.
To be eligible for such benefits, the firm or individual must be the first to come to CADE
with information regarding the conduct, and must also confess its participation. That is, the
agility in identifying the problem and in contacting CADE is essential in granting partial or total
immunity.
Such promptness is directly affected by compliance. Well-structured programs are
capable, even when they cannot stop the conduct from taking place, of readily identifying
distortions and becoming aware of the infringement, which enables the company to deal with
the situation, turning to CADE to enter into a leniency agreement and therefore avoid severe
penalties.
The compliance program does not guarantee that a leniency agreement will be
celebrate, however it can increase the chances for an organization to apply for it.
3.3.2 Settlement Agreements
If the company or individual contacting CADE in order to report an infringement cannot
sign a leniency agreement for not being the first in line, they still have the chance of
negotiating a settlement agreement (or TCC, for the Portuguese acronym).
A TCC, differently from a leniency agreement, can also be used in case of unlawful single-
firm conduct. Entering into this type of agreement with the Superintendence in the initial
stages of an investigation ensures a reduction in expected fines for the proponents, on a first-
39come, first-served basis, according to the criteria set out on Resolution no. 5/2013. In light of
it, the compliance program or the commitment to its adoption/restructuring can influence the
discount granted.
Once again, the promptness in identifying the infringement and acting on it, which is
aided by having a compliance program, is essential in guaranteeing the best possible financial
benefits under a TCC. The compliance program does not ensure the celebration of a settlement
agreement, but, as in the case of leniency agreements, it may substantially increase the
organization’s chances of doing so.
3.3.3 Consultations
Article 9, §4 of the Brazilian Competition Law authorizes the Tribunal to answer
consultations regarding the interpretation of the Law, including in terms of the legality of
commercial practices, whether they are already in place or still in planning.
Awareness fostered by the adoption of a compliance program tends to facilitate
initiatives such as these consultations. In the case of consummated collusive practices,
compliance will increase the organization’s chances of signing leniency agreements, whereas
in the case of practices whose lawfulness is questionable, compliance helps companies in
bringing those questions to the authorities. That is positive because the answer from the
Tribunal, when allowing the conduct, is binding for a maximum of five years and prevents a
different understanding from being applied retroactively to the party which presented the
consultation. If the answer is in the negative, that is, if the company is advised not to proceed
with the practice, there is also a palpable benefit. The firm has the opportunity to avoid
engaging in anticompetitive behavior, thereby saving resources that could have been spent
both executing the commercial strategy and in possible investigations which would challenge
the legality of such practices.
In other words, the effects are significant and can generate many benefits to a company,
especially when it comes to legal certainty regarding its commercial practices.
403.3.4 Sentencing
As shown in the previous items, although a Compliance program is not enough to avoid
the possibility of imposition of sanctions by CADE, in some situations it can have favorable
effects when these sanctions are established. For example, it can remove specific prohibitions
or even reduce the amount of the applicable fine. This happens since, as foreseen in Article 45
of the Competition Law, when applying sanctions, CADE’s Tribunal must take into
consideration variables such as the good faith of the infringer, the extent of damage to free
competition, to the national economy, to the consumers or third parties, the negative economic
effects it produced in the market and recidivism.
The existence of a strong compliance program, with damage control measures, that
meets the requirements set out in section 3.2 above, may be considered evidence of good faith
on the part of the infringing company and of the reduction of the negative economic effects
derived from the unlawful practice. Thus it is possible for the Tribunal to consider the
compliance program as (i) evidence of good faith and a mitigating factor when stipulating the
fine, resulting in its reduction or as (ii) criterion to be considered when calculating the pecuniary
contribution to be paid by the company, in case a settlement agreement is signed, which could
take the discount percentage to the maximum allowed. In addition, programs with those
characteristics tend to reduce the risk of recidivism, which doubles the applicable fine imposed
by CADE.
It should be emphasized that the burden of proof belongs solely to the investigated
party, which must show the existence of a strong compliance program under which
anticompetitive practices are contrary to the organization’s policies and to the orientations of
its managers and directors.
4. Final Remarks
As the idea behind competition compliance programs is that entities always act in
accordance with the Competition Law, it is sensible that organizations have access to the
widest possible range of information regarding the application of the law.
41Thus, as a complement to this material, CADE recommends the reading of the other
guidelines available at its website, as well as the constant monitoring of the authority’s
decisions and of the evolution of the debates on national and international spheres.
42