Ministry of Justice
Administrative Council for Economic Defense
GUIDELINES FOR THE ANALYSIS OF PREVIOUS CONSUMMATION
OF MERGER TRANSACTIONS
CADE's Presidency
SEPN 515 Conjunto D, Lote 4, Ed. Carlos Taurisano
Zip: 70770-504 – Brasília/DF
www.cade.gov.brCoordination:
Vinicius Marques de Carvalho
Eduardo Frade Rodrigues
Editing:
Ana Carolina Lopes de Carvalho
Revision:
Ana Frazão
Gilvandro Vasconcelos Coelho de Araújo
Márcio de Oliveira Júnior
In-house staff:
Amanda Athayde Linhares Martins
Daniel Gustavo Santos Roque
Outside staff:
Caio Mario da Silva Pereira Neto
Eduardo Caminati Anders
Patricia Avigni
Graphic project:
CADE’s Public Relations UnitSUMMARY
Introduction 5
Activities that might constitute previous consummation of a
Section 1. 7
merger transaction (gun jumping)
Section 2. Procedures to mitigate the risk of gun jumping 10
2.1 Antitrust Protocol 10
2.2 Clean Team and Executive Committee 10
2.3 Access to information 11
2.4 Confidentiality 12
2.5 Processing the information 12
2.6 Parlor Room 13
Penalties possibly imposed in case of previous consummation
Section 3. 14
of a merger transaction
3.1 Imposition of a pecuniary penalty 14
3.2 Opening of an administrative proceeding 15
3.3 Nullity of the acts performed 15Introduction
The New Brazilian Competition Law No. 12.529/2011 established the pre-merger control in
Brazil (Article 88, §2). Article 90 of the Law defines a merger as any operation in which: (i) two
or more previously independent companies merge; (ii) one or more companies acquire, directly
or indirectly, by purchase or exchange of stocks, shares, bonds or securities convertible into
stocks or assets, whether tangible or intangible, by contract or by any other means or way,
the control or parts of one or more companies; (iii) one or more companies incorporate one or
more companies; or (iv) two or more companies enter into associative, consortium or joint
venture agreements.
The consummation of mergers before the antitrust authority reaches a final decision (a practice
known as gun jumping) is, however, forbidden by Article 88, §3 of the Brazilian Competition
Law. This Article prohibits companies from closing a transaction before CADE is concludes its
analysis, under penalty of nullity and of a fine ranging from BRL 60,000.00 to BRL
60,000,000.00 – depending on the economic condition, intent and bad faith of the parties
involved and the anti-competitive potential of the transaction, among others – without
prejudice to the opening of an administrative proceeding against the involved parties. Thus,
the competitive conditions among parties must remain preserved until a final decision is
rendered (Article 88, §4).
These provisions under Article 88, caput and §3 of the Law No. 12.529/2011 have been
regulated by CADE’s Internal Statute (RiCADE). Article 108, §1 of the latter determines that
mergers must be notified preferably after a formal binding instrument is signed by the parties
and prior to the consummation of any act related to the transaction. Moreover, Article 108,
§2, determines that the parties involved in a merger maintain their physical structures
unchanged and remain competitors until the antitrust authority has a final assessment of the
transaction. It bars, in particular, “any asset transfer and any type of influence of one party
over another, and the exchange of competitively-sensitive information not strictly necessary
for the signature of the formal instrument binding the parties”.
This provision is intended to be broad due to the wide diversity of legal transactions considered
as mergers for the purposes of the law. Thus, parties are initially responsible for clearly
determining the limits to their relation, capable of preventing changes to physical structures
and competitive conditions – which are intrinsic to a merger transaction.
Notwithstanding, aiming at better instructing the parties, promoting legal certainty, mitigating
merger transaction costs and facilitating the lawful integration of the economic agents’
activities, these Guidelines set some parameters in which merging parties may rely while
designing their transactions. The instructions are based both on CADE's initial experience with
5the enactment of Law No. 12.529/2011, as wells as on other applicable sources of compared
law that set precautions for joint activities and prior exchange of information among different
companies.
It should also be emphasized that because of its very unique features, it is not possible to
make abstract generalizations that could apply to all situations. Thus, any gun jumping must
at all times be considered and verified in light of the particularities of each case. Nevertheless,
the parameters below may be used as a reference by economic agents in their negotiations
and merger assessments.
These Guidelines are divided in three sections. The first section addresses the definition of gun
jumping and the activities that may lead to its configuration. The second section describes
specific procedures economic actors may adopt to mitigate risks of gun jumping, such as the
creation of clean teams and parlor rooms. The third section closes with a debate over penalties
economic actors may face for failing to comply with the provisions of Article 88, caput and §3,
of the Brazilian Competition Law.
The purpose of these Guidelines is to serve as a mechanism of administrative transparency and
orientation with no binding effects.
6Section 1. Activities that might constitute previous consummation of a
merger transaction (gun jumping)
This section aims at setting brief guidelines on the types of business activities related to merger
transactions that may generate gun jumping concerns. Such activities can be divided into three
major groups: (i) the exchange of information between economic agents involved in a merger;
(ii) the definition of contractual clauses governing the relationship between economic agents;
and (iii) the activities of the parties before and during the implementation of the merger.
As to (i) the exchange of information between economic agents involved in a merger, any
unnecessary exchange of competitively-sensitive information between the parties should be
avoided, as such exchange can harm competition between them if the merger is not yet
consummated (either for the lack of CADE's approval or issues related to the negotiation itself).
It is known that any merger implies the sharing of information between the parties to some
extent, especially during the due diligence that generally precedes mergers and acquisitions.
The extension of such information exchange may, however, vary, based on how integrated the
parties will be after the merger and the complexity of the business under creation.
Notwithstanding, CADE’s case law and other authorities overseas tend to hold certain
information particularly sensitive to the dynamics of competition, which is why the abuse on
the information exchange may constitute gun jumping.
In general, competitively-sensitive information (therefore deservers of parties’ special
attention) is specific (e.g. non-aggregated) and directly related to the performance of the
economic agents’ core business. Such information may contain specific data about:
a) costs of the companies involved;
b) capacity level and plans for expansion;
c) marketing strategies;
d) product pricing (prices and deductions);
e) main customers and deductions ensured;
f) employees’ wages;
g) main suppliers and the terms of the contracts signed with them;
h) non-public information on marks and patents and Research and Development (R&D);
i) plans for future acquisitions;
j) competition strategies, etc.
It is important to emphasize that concerns over the treatment of business-sensitive information
can be reduced by the aggregation/anonymization of the data to be shared with
counterparties, by presenting information after a certain time lapse and by creating clean
teams and parlor rooms (specially for more complex operations demanding a higher exchange
of information between the parties), as Section 2 of these Guidelines will highlight.
7The (ii) definition of contractual clauses governing the relationship between economic agents,
in its turn, focuses on the content of the rules governing the relationship between the economic
agents before CADE finishes its assessment. As mentioned above, until the agency concludes
its analysis, the concerns of the parties should always focus on maintaining the competitive
environment which existed before the merger as intact as possible. Accordingly, such
contractual clauses are intrinsically connected to the competitively sensitive activities described
in more details below.
There is a myriad of possible contractual provisions to formalize a merger, thus listing every
clause the antitrust authority could hold as unlawful is impossible. Despite the above, among
those demanding greater attention there are the provisions that can result in a premature
integration of the activities of the merging parties. Such contractual provisions comprise:
a) no anteriority clause related to the term of effectiveness of the contract in relation to
the date of its execution that brings any integration among parties;
b) prior non-compete clause;
c) clause for full or partial payment, non-reimbursable, in advance, in consideration for
the target, except in case of (c.i.) typical down payment for business transactions, (c.ii.)
deposit in escrow accounts, or (c.iii.) breakup fee clauses (payable if the transaction is
not consummated);
d) clauses allowing direct interference by any party in the other party's business strategies
by submitting, for example, decisions over prices, customers, business/sales policy,
planning, marketing strategies and other sensitive decisions (that do not constitute a
mere protection against deviation from the normal course of business and,
consequently, the protection of the value of the business being sold);
e) in general terms, any clause providing for activities that cannot be reversed at a later
time or which imply the expenditure of a significant amount of resources by the agents
involved or the authority, etc.
Lastly, as to (iii) the activities of the parties before and during the implementation of a merger,
these activities mainly concern the effective consummation of at least part of the transaction
before it is duly approved by the antitrust authority. Some practices that can raise concerns to
CADE are, among others:
a) transfer and/or usufruct of assets in general (including voting securities);
b) exercise of voting right or relevant influence on the counterparty's activities (such as
decisions regarding prices, customers, business/sales policy, planning, marketing
strategies, interruption of investments, discontinuing of products and others);
c) receipt of profits or other payments connected to the performance of the counterparty;
8d) development of joint strategies for sales or marketing that set up an unified
management;
e) integration of the sales force among the parties;
f) licensing the use of exclusive intellectual property to the counterparty;
g) joint development of products;
h) appointment of members to a decision-making body; and
i) interruption of investments, etc.
It is important to reinforce that the list above presents only a few examples of the activities
CADE may, after a case-by-case review of the particular features of the transaction, consider
illicit for constituting previous consummation of a merger (gun jumping).
9Section 2. Procedures to reduce the risk of gun jumping
Merging companies may follow some relationship patterns while the transaction is being
negotiated or going through an antitrust assessment. This Section addresses possible ways of
reducing gun jumping risks.
With the sole purpose of examining if the transaction is feasible, competitors may share
business-sensitive information, both while negotiation is ongoing and while CADE is assessing
the merger. To make sure the information will be shared pursuant to the Law No. 12.529/2011,
companies should, among other measures, set specific procedures to be observed by
independent committees that will handle such information (“Antitrust Protocol”). The aim
underlying such measure is to prevent executives, employees or representatives of one
company from having access to competitively sensitive information from the other party.
2.1 Antitrust protocol
Specific procedures to be followed by the parties, until a final decision is rendered by CADE,
may be formalized as an "Antitrust Protocol", e.g. a document adopting procedures that are in
line with what is suggested in these Guidelines.
2.2 Clean Team and Executive Committee
Independent committees can be composed of employees, independent consultants or both
("clean team"), or executives of each company ("executive committee").
The clean team is indicated for complex transactions where (i) there is significant concentration
between the companies, (ii) it is necessary to exchange a vast amount of information or (iii)
the transaction creates potential competitive risks.
The clean team is responsible for sending, receiving, gathering, analyzing and handling
information related to the transaction. For this reason, clean team members are advised to
sign a confidentiality agreement and to strictly observe the antitrust protocol previously
agreed.
Clean team members may contact employees of the merging companies, but they may not
disclose information of one company to another. If some clean team members are employees
of the companies, they should request and receive information only from their own company.
It is recommended that such employees work exclusively in the clean team or have it as a
priority.
10Any communication or request/sending of information should be made in writing and each
clean team member should have a specific e-mail address for this purpose.
The clean team should classify the information received from the companies as: (i) public, (ii)
confidential or (iii) competitively-sensitive. Any confidential and competitively-sensitive
information has to be treated pursuant to the antitrust protocol.
Based on the information received from the companies' employees, the clean team may
prepare a report on the transaction feasibility, which will be sent to the executive committee
(formed by executives of the companies involved in the transaction).
The executive committee will then analyze the data the clean team sent and it might ask for
details, within the limits set in the antitrust protocol.
The clean team must directly and exclusively report to the executive committee members, who
must receive, at the same time, identical information for evaluation.
The clean team members cannot participate in the executive committee or vice versa.
The information exchange process should be formally registered and the parties should
expressly commit to preserve data confidentiality.
2.3 Access to information
The information must be exclusively exchanged by the clean team, which is the only contact
point between the companies.
The data must be transmitted through different and independent communication channels. For
example: (i) clean team – company A; (ii) clean team – company B; (iii) clean team - executive
committee.
The information requested by the clean team to the companies' employees has to be restricted
to what is strictly necessary for the operation. That means that the clean team or the executive
committee must not analyze any data on other activities performed by the companies.
Any change in the composition of the clean team or executive committee must be informed to
the other members in writing. The new member should sign a confidentiality agreement and
comply with the antitrust protocol.
112.4 Confidentiality
All clean team and executive committee members must commit to preserve the merger data
secrecy, especially of those information considered confidential or competitively-sensitive,
even in view of the possibility of leaving the committee or the company. No data or information
may be used, copied, transferred, published or mentioned without the companies' express
consent.
Any information concerning the merger should be considered confidential, except for publically
available information or otherwise considered as public by the company who owns it.
"Information" means any data belonging to the companies, whether original or copy, printed
on paper or in electronic means, in text, spreadsheet, graphic or image format.
The access to the information is restricted to the clean team that must (i) carefully process the
information by adopting protective measures to store the data in order to prevent non-
authorized third parties from accessing it; (ii) keep register of any information received from
the companies by identifying its nature, intend and storage.
2.5 Information treatment
The clean team may receive competitively-sensitive information from the companies. Upon
receipt of this kind of information, the clean team must keep it in strict secrecy and must not
disclose it to the executive committee or any third party.
If an assessment on the transaction feasibility is needed, the clean team should process the
competitively-sensitive data by converting it into aggregated and/or historical information,
within a recommended periodicity of at least three (3) months of its occurrence. Only after
processed, the competitively-sensitive data can be shared with the executive committee.
It is recommended that the clean team meets and maintains all merger information in an
exclusive room, ideally located outside the companies' facilities.
If the negotiation finishes without the consummation of the merger, the companies must
demand that the clean team return or destroy integrally all the information sent and/or
processed, so that no data is kept in files or is reused in the future.
If the negotiation finishes without the consummation of the merger, the companies may
reassign the employees to their former activities, while the confidentiality obligation will
remain, including in relation to the company itself.
122.6 Parlor Room
Executive committee members can meet to discuss the future integration between the merging
companies, in specific meetings set for this purpose.
The parlor room meetings should be monitored in order to ensure that no competitively-
sensitive information becomes the subject of discussions. Therefore, it is recommended that
all parlor room activities are registered and supervised by an independent member.
The discussions in the parlor room cannot result in any kind of interference or partnership
between the companies before CADE approves the merger. For example, no measure or
procedure should be taken that may result in transferring or sharing of employees; restrictions
to the other party's activities/enterprise in the market, with its customers or with suppliers;
changes in the other party agreements or joint notifications to third parties on behalf of the
integrated or organized company.
13Section 3. Penalties possibly imposed in case of previous
consummation of a merger transaction
Article 88, §3, of Law No. 12.529/2011, sets, while addressing gun jumping:
§ 3º The acts found under the provisions set forth in the caput of this article shall not
be consummated before being reviewed, pursuant to 1this article and the procedure
set forth in Chapter II of Title VI of this Law, under penalty of nullity and of a fine not
inferior to sixty thousand reais (BRL 60,000.00) or higher than sixty million reais (BRL
60,000,000.00), to be imposed pursuant to the terms of the regulation, without
prejudice to the opening of an administrative proceeding, under Article 69 of this Law.
The analysis of this provision leads to the conclusion that three (3) consequences result from
CADE's decision confirming the occurrence of gun jumping, which are:
a) the imposition of a pecuniary penalty ranging from BRL 60.000,00 (sixty thousand
Brazilian reais) to BRL 60.000.000,00 (sixty million Brazilian reais);
b) the opening of an administrative proceeding, pursuant to Article 69 of Law No.
12.529/2011;
c) the nullity of the acts found under the provisions set forth in the caput of Article 88 of
Law No. 12.529/2011, if consummated before CADE's assessment.
This Section 3 aims at discussing the application of each of these sanctions set by law, and to
list, specifically concerning the imposition of the pecuniary penalty, some factors that may
guide CADE while deciding on the fine calculation criteria.
3.1 Imposition of pecuniary penalty
The parameters for the fine calculation criteria must, in case of gun jumping, take into
consideration the requirements of the general rule of Article 45 of Law No. 12.529/2011 on
the imposition of sanctions. By considering the requirements mentioned in Article 45, it is
assured that the rationale of the fine calculation in the event of gun jumping will be in pace
with the Brazilian Competition Law.
Generally speaking, it is understood that, within the strict parameters of Article 45 of the Law
No. 12.529/2011, the following factors, among others, are considered:
a) as to the status of the transaction, whenever CADE suspects of gun jumping, it
considers, for example, if (i) the transaction was not notified and was consummated
14without the notification; (ii) the transaction was notified to CADE only after
consummation and after CADE opened an administrative proceeding to investigate the
merger – APAC in its acronym in Portuguese; (iii) the transaction was notified to CADE
only after consummation, but without CADE's awereness of its existence and (iv) the
transaction was notified to CADE and consummated later, but before the decision was
rendered;
b) the nature of CADE's decision (block, conditional approval and unconditional
approval), as well as the existence of horizontal overlap or vertical integration resulting
from the transaction; and
c) the time and the economic size of the infringer.
In any of the cases, the penalty is never lower than BRL 60.000,00 (sixty thousand Brazilian
reais) or higher than BRL 60.000.000,00 (sixty million Brazilian reais), considering that these
are the minimum and maximum amounts set by the legislator for such cases.
3.2 Opening of an administrative proceeding
With respect to the opening of an administrative proceeding, it should be noted that possible
infringements may arise from the integration of structures as a result of the merger. Here are
some examples of practices that may lead to such situation: exchange of sensitive information,
agreement between competitors on pricing, interference in the decisions of the target
company, especially in cases of vertical integration or horizontal overlap.
The administrative proceeding is opened by CADE’s General Superintendence, according to the
procedure provided in Article 69 et al of the Law No. 12.529/2011.
3.3 Nullity of acts performed
Finally, with respect to the nullity of the acts performed, it is considered, among other issues,
the timing of the conduct (the nullity is projected over the acts performed within the period
between the transaction consummation and CADE's judgment); the proportionality of the
measure and whether validating the business conducts performed is possible or not.
15