1Ministry of Justice and Public Security
Administrative Council for Economic Defense
Guide for Fighting Cartels in Procurements
Administrative Council for Economic Defense – Cade
SEPN 515 Conjunto D, Lote 4, Ed. Carlos Taurisano
Zip Code: 70770-504 – Brasília/DF
www.cade.gov.br
2Institutional Presentation
President of Brazil
Jair Messias Bolsonaro
Minister of Justice and Public Security
Sérgio Fernando Moro
CADE President
Alexandre Barreto de Souza
CADE Commissioners
Mauricio Oscar Bandeira Maia
Paula Farani de Azevedo Silveira
Lenisa Rodrigues Prado
Luis Henrique Bertolino Braido
Sérgio Costa Ravagnani
Luiz Augusto Azevedo de Almeida Hoffmann
CADE General Superintendent
Alexandre Cordeiro Macedo
CADE General Attorney
Walter de Agra Junior
CADE Chief Economist
Guilherme Mendes Resende
3Editorial Information
Coordination
Amanda Athayde Linhares Martins Rivera
Diogo Thomson de Andrade
Fernanda Garcia Machado
Proofreading
Alexandre Cordeiro Macedo
Collaboration
Beatriz Bellintani
Felipe Leitão Valadares Roquete
Juliano Pimentel Duarte
Lívia Dias de Melo
Mariana Piccoli Lins Cavalcanti
Mônica Tiemy Fujimoto
Priscilla Craveiro da Costa Campos
Renata Souza da Silva
Editing and Graphic Designing
Communications Unit of CADE
Translation
Arianne Mesquita Rodrigues
Bruna Queiroz Assunção
Editing and Proofreading (English)
Ariel Daltrozo Menezes
Bruna Queiroz Assunção
Nayara Kazeoka Zago
4CONTENT
PRESENTATION
INTRODUCTION - WHAT ARE CARTELS IN PROCUREMENTS AND WHAT
ARE THEIR CONSEQUENCES?
PART I - CARTELS IN PROCUREMENTS: BASIC NOTIONS AND A BRIEF
OVERVIEW OF THE FIGHT AGAINST CARTELS IN BRAZIL
I.1. Cartels in procurements according to Competition Law
I.1.1. How are cartels penalised? The penalties imposed by the
Administrative Tribunal of CADE
I.1.2. How are cartels detected? Cartel detection methods
1.2. Other authorities responsible for investigating and penalising cartel
conduct and other related infractions: fighting cartels in procurements in
the administrative, criminal and civil domains, related infractions, and
competent authorities
PART II - DETECTING CARTELS IN PROCUREMENTS: ENABLERS,
FORMS OF COLLUSION AND EVIDENCE
II.1. Which aspects enable cartel formation? Characteristics of
government procurement markets favourable for the creation of cartels
and favourable for the monitoring of cartels in procurement processes
II.2. Difficulties in detecting cartels in government procurements and the
importance of circumstantial evidence
II.3. Types of collusion: the main strategies used by companies to form
cartels in procurements
II.3.1. Cover Bidding
II.3.2. Bid suppression and bid withdrawal
II.3.3. Bidder collusion in in-person reverse auction
II.3.4. Bid rotation
II.3.5. Market division
II.3.6. Other strategies: legal mechanisms used to implement
anticompetitive strategies
II.4. Evidence of collusion in government procurements
5PART III – PREVENTING CARTELS IN PROCUREMENTS
III.1. Contributions of government procurement officials to the fight against
cartels
III.2. What measures can be adopted to mitigate the risk of having a cartel
in procurements
PART IV – CRIMES ASSOCIATED WITH CARTELS IN PROCUREMENTS
IV.1. Cartel and fraud in procurements
IV.2. Cartel in procurements and corruption
6PRESENTATION1
This Guide for Fighting Cartels in Procurements, elaborated by the Administrative
Council for Economic Defense (CADE), updates the 2008 Handbook Fighting
Cartels in Procurements2 by the former Secretariat of Economic Law of the
Minister of Justice (SDE/MJ)3 and is aimed at assembling the experience gained
by the Brazilian antitrust authority during the more than twenty years it has been
fighting cartels, especially the experience related to collusion in government
procurement processes.
In this regard, the main purpose with this Guide is instructing and providing
assistance to all parties involved in organising and carrying out procurement
processes (such as auctioneers, members of procurement committees, and
other authorities responsible for investigating and penalising this sort of illegal
conduct), and to society at large, regarding how to recognise the main signs of
collusive behaviour in government procurements, with the intent of improving
the chances of cartels being detected, prevented and penalized accordingly.
Disclaimer: This document is neither binding nor a rule (i.e. it does not change
any of the provisions of the Statutes of CADE). Practices and procedures hereby
described may be amended as CADE sees convenient and opportune,
depending on the specific circumstances of actual cases.
This Guide is divided into four parts:
(I)Cartels in procurements: basic notions and a brief overview of the fight against
cartels in Brazil
(II) Detecting cartels in procurements: enablers, forms of collusion and evidence
(III) Preventing cartels in procurements: what can be done
(IV) Crimes associated with cartels in procurements
1We would like to acknowledge the assistance of former students from the PinCade program Bruna
Caixeta, Elisa Sarto, Julia Braga and Mario Norris in the researches that subsidised this document.
2The original document Cartilha de Combate a Cartéis em Licitações by the former Secretariat of
Economic Law of the Ministry of Justice (SDE/MJ) was published in 2008 and is available only in
Portuguese at: <http://www.cade.gov.br/acesso-a-informacao/publicacoes-
institucionais/documentos-da-antiga-lei/cartilha_licitacao.pdf/view>.
3Duties of the SDE/MJ have been taken on by the General Superintendence of CADE, in
accordance with the provisions of Law 12529/2011.
7INTRODUCTION – WHAT ARE CARTELS IN PROCUREMENTS AND WHAT
ARE THEIR CONSEQUENCES?
Cartels in procurement are a form of collusion amongst economic agents aimed
at eliminating or restricting competition in government procurements of goods
and services.
This practice changes the regular and expected conditions of effective
competition in a procurement, imposing less favourable conditions for the
Government to purchase goods and services, such as higher prices and inferior
goods and services, or even limiting the purchase to an inferior amount than
what was originally intended.
In other words, cartels in government procurements undermine the efforts of the
Government to efficiently and effectively dispose of its assets to provide society
with goods and services and promote the development of the country, thus
being detrimental to society as a whole.
All levels of the Brazilian Government (federal, state, and local governments, as
well as the government of the Federal District) allocate every year considerable
amounts for the acquisition of goods and services needed to carry out their
duties. Such legal arrangements allow the State to fulfil its responsibilities related
to healthcare, education, public security, infrastructure and others.
In order to better use its assets, the Government must make purchases based on
the best proposal for itself, considering, among other aspects, the quality and
price of the good or service. The procurement must meet high standards of
equity, quality and efficiency, without favouring any competitor. Therefore, it is
of utmost importance that procurements be transparent and economical. These
principles are closely related to competition in a procurement. Procurements
with clear and widely known rules allow for a higher number of bidders,
increasing competitiveness and, consequently, resulting in more advantageous
proposals. Thus, for the Government, effective competition among companies
in procurements is essential.
8According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD)4, such collusions take assets from acquirers and taxpayers, weaken
public confidence in the competitive process and undermine the advantages
of a competitive market.
The severity of cartels in procurements: according to the OECD, considering its
member countries, government procurements represent approximately 15% of
their respective GDPs, and should one consider non-member countries this
percentage might be even higher. In Brazil, in 2018, the Federal Government
alone carried out more than 100 thousand procurement processes, totalling
about BRL 48 billion5, an amount that shows the impact cartels have on the
Treasury.
The Brazilian legal system, like those of many other countries, provides for several
procurement methods, in an attempt to adapt the procurement to different
situations, rationalise the contracting process and optimise the allocation of
assets. Among the main methods currently being used, it is worth mentioning
those provided for (1) in Law 8666/1993 (the Procurement Law); (2) in Law
10520/2002 (the Reverse Auction Law); (3) in Law 12462/2011 (the Direct
Contracting Law); and (4) in Law 13303/2016 (State-Owned Companies Law).
Each one of these methods entails specific advantages and disadvantages, thus
an ideal method that avoids or resolve any possible problem does not exist, be
them antitrust issues or any of several other problems that affect procurements.
In any case, even though no procurement method is immune from fraud, the
requesting agency, following best practices, is responsible for designing notices
that, on the one hand, encourage competitiveness and the participation of as
many bidders as possible, and on the other hand, make it difficult for cartels to
operate. Thereby, this Guide is not dedicated to any specific method of
procurement, it is rather aimed at pinpointing the characteristics of government
acquisitions that may facilitate collusion, the main strategies used by economic
4OECD. Guidelines for Fighting Bid Rigging in Public Procurement (2009). Available at:
<https://www.oecd.org/daf/competition/cartels/42851044.pdf>.
5Data collected from the Brazilian Federal Government Procurement Dashboard. Available at:
<http://paineldecompras.planejamento.gov.br>. Retrieved: 24 Jan 2019.
9agents, and the most common evidence of a cartel, improving the chances of
cartels being prevented and detected.
PART 1 - CARTELS IN PROCUREMENTS: BASIC NOTIONS AND A BRIEF
OVERVIEW OF THE FIGHT AGAINST CARTELS IN BRAZIL
I.1. Cartels in procurements according to Competition Law
In general, a cartel consists of an agreement or practice concerted amongst
competitors to fix prices, establish quotas or limit production, divide operation
markets and settle any competitively sensitive variable, both in government and
private procurements. It is universally considered the most outrageous economic
crime6.
According to the OECD, cartels:
(…) harm consumers and have pernicious effects on economic
efficiency. A successful cartel raises price above the competitive
level and reduces output. Consumers (which include businesses
and governments) choose either not to pay the higher price for
some or all of the cartelised product that they desire, thus
forgoing the product, or they pay the cartel price and thereby
unknowingly transfer wealth to the cartel operators. Further, a
cartel shelters its members from full exposure to market forces,
reducing pressures on them to control costs and to innovate. All
of these effects harm efficiency in a market economy7.
As previously mentioned, among the several types of cartel, cartels in
procurements are especially devastating because they prevent or spoil the
Government’s chances of making purchases of quality goods and services for a
6See precedents set by CADE, such as: Opinion 24/2015 by the General Superintendence which
launched Administrative Proceeding 08700.007351/2015-51; the Opinion by the General
Superintendence which launched Administrative Proceeding 08012.008821/2008-22, and the vote
of the Rapporteur of the case, Commissioner Gilvandro Vasconcelos; and the Opinion by the
former SDE regarding Administrative Proceeding 08012.005255/2010-11.
Likewise, the OECD (2002) has stated that “Cartels are universally recognised as the most harmful
of all types of anticompetitive conduct. Moreover, they offer no legitimate economic or social
benefits that would justify the losses that they generate.”
7OECD, Hard Core Cartels: Recent progress and challenges ahead (OECD Publishing, 2003), p. 8.
Available at: <https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264101258-en>.
10lower price, resulting in heavy losses to the Treasury and, consequently, to
taxpayers.
According to the OECD8, cartels result in overpricing of about 10% to 20%9,
comparing to the price in a competitive market, causing annual losses of
hundreds of billions of Brazilian reals to consumers. In terms of amounts, some of
the most relevant cases of collusion are linked to government procurements10.
An example in Brazil is the Security Revolving Doors Cartel (Administrative
Proceeding 08012.009611/2008-51), which, according to studies by the
Department of Economic Studies of CADE, the collusion resulted in overpricing
of 25%11.
Considered an extremely serious anticompetitive practice, cartel behaviour is
covered in Law 12529/2011 (the Brazilian Competition Law), in its article 36,
section 3, subsection 1(d):
Art. 36. It is considered an economic crime, regardless of fault,
each and every practice carried out anyhow, intended to or
which can have the following effects, even if not successful:
(…)
Section 3. The following conducts, amongst others, insofar as
they have been provided for in the head of this article or its
sections, are considered economic crimes:
Section 1. agreeing, combining, manipulating or colluding with
competitors, by any means:
8OECD. Fighting Hard Core Cartels: harm effective sanctions and leniency programs (2002).
Available at: <www.ocde.org/competition>.
9Despite difficulties in estimating increases in price and, more broadly, the damages caused, a
conservative estimative indicates an increase of 10% per year in prices because of cartel activity
(WERDEN, 2009, p. 12). Other authors mention more alarming numbers with average overpricing
in cartelised markets varying between 10% and 20%, and even reaching up to 50% (ARAUJO,
CHEDE, 2012; CONNOR, BOLOTOVA, 2006). According to Connor, average overpricing for all types
of cartels is of 23%, considering a long term from 1890 to 2013 (CONNOR, 2014); however,
depending on the year and the type of cartel this percentage may be substantially higher, for
example, from 1990 to 1999, average overpricing for international cartels was about 45.5%.
10MCAFFEE, R. Preston; MCMILLAN, John. Bidding rings. The American Economic Review: vol. 82, no.
3, June 1992, p. 579.
11See the opinion by the Department of Economic Studies of CADE (DEE/CADE) which has been
attached to the vote of Commissioner Gilvandro Vasconcelos Coelho de Araujo (Administrative
Proceeding 08012.009611/2008-51).
11a) the prices of goods or services individually offered;
b) the production or trade of a restricted or limited amount of
goods, or the provision of a restricted or limited amount, volume
or frequency of services.
c) the division of parts or segments of a current or potential
market for goods or services, by means of, amongst others,
dividing customers, suppliers, regions or periods;
d) the prices, conditions, advantages or non-participation in
government procurements.
I.1.1. How are cartels penalised? The penalties imposed by the
Administrative Tribunal of CADE12
According to the provisions of Law 12529/201113, companies participating in
cartels are subject to administrative fines imposed by the Tribunal of the
Administrative Council for Economic Defense which may vary between 0.1% and
20% of the gross turnover corresponding to the field of activity related to the
respective crime, in addition to other penalties such as publication of the
decision in a widely read newspaper; prohibition of contracting with official
financial institutions and of participating in government procurements; and
divestiture of assets. Individuals involved in the practice are also subject to fines
varying between BRL 50 thousand and BRL 2 billion, and, should the individuals
be administrators directly or indirectly responsible for the crime, the applicable
fine may vary between 1% and 20% of the one imposed to the company.
One of the most severe penalties CADE may impose to cartels in procurements
is prohibiting the wrongdoer from participating in procurements for a minimum
of 5 years14.
12As it shall be seen in item I.2, cartel is also a criminal offence according to the Brazilian Law. Thus,
besides the administrative penalties imposed by CADE, individuals involved in cartels are also liable
to fines and imprisonment for 2 to 5 years, in accordance with art. 4 of Law 8137/1990, which defines
economic and tax crimes, as well as crimes against consumers.
13See Law 12529/2011, art. 37 and 38.
14The measure has similar effects to those of the declaration of ineligibility provided for in the
Procurement Law (Law 8666/1993), in its article 87, section 4.
12I.1.2. How are cartels detected? Cartel detection methods
Members of a cartel, aware of the unlawfulness of their behaviour and afraid of
being detected, especially considering the significant increase in cartel
prosecution and punishment in recent years, are often extremely careful and
prudent with information, meetings and the accomplishment and
implementation of their agreements, making it increasingly difficult to detect a
cartel. For that reason, authorities need more elaborate detection and
investigation techniques in their toolbox for a cartel investigation to be
successful.
The existence of cartels can be known to CADE in many ways. It can be reported
by companies or individuals involved in the collusion, in which case the informers
can have their penalties reduced or even gain immunity, as it will be seen below.
Third parties or other authorities can also report such practices to CADE, and the
antitrust authority itself has investigation tools to use when a suspicion of cartel
arises.
The main means currently used by CADE to detect cartels are listed below.
1. Leniency Agreement15
A Leniency Agreement is a mechanism aimed at bringing illegal practices to the
knowledge of the antitrust authority which could, otherwise, continue to be
undisclosed. At the same time, it ensures a more efficient investigation, which is
why it is widely used in several countries16.
15For further information on the Leniency Program, see CADE’s Antitrust Leniency Program Guide.
Portuguese version available at: <http://www.cade.gov.br/acesso-a-informacao/publicacoes-
institucionais/guias_do_Cade/guia_programa-de-leniencia-do-cade-final.pdf>. English version
available at: <http://www.cade.gov.br/acesso-a-informacao/publicacoes-
institucionais/guias_do_Cade/guidelines-cades-antitrust-leniency-program-1.pdf>.
16The benefits of designing a leniency program have been studied and agreed on by several
authorities worldwide. The mechanism is appointed as an important tool for effectively fighting
cartels, as it: i) discourages companies from participating in cartels; ii) encourages companies to
withdrawal from pre-established cartels; iii) increases the probability of detecting a cartel; and iv)
increases the possibility of the conduct being punished by the Government. For more information
on this matter, see: International Competition Network. Anti-cartel enforcement manual. Chapter
2: Drafting and implementing an effective leniency policy (2014). Available at:
<https://www.internationalcompetitionnetwork.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/05/CWG_ACEMLeniency.pdf>.
As highlighted by the OECD in its report about fighting hardcore cartels (2019, p.6), the main
challenge for a policy to fight cartels is precisely its detection which is the aspect that explains the
13In Brazil, the Leniency Program17 has as its premise that individuals or companies,
currently or previously involved in cartels, can confess and collaborate with
investigations in exchange for total immunity or partial in relation to applicable
administrative and criminal penalties. The collaboration involves presenting
information and documents that allow CADE to identify other co-authors and
evidence of the practice reported or under investigation.
It must be emphasized that only the first individual or company to report the
conduct will be granted administrative and criminal immunity, that is, exemption
from monetary and nonmonetary penalties, which means the programme is a
destabilising element for current cartels.
The Leniency Program is one of the most effective mechanisms for detecting,
investigating and preventing anticompetitive behaviours with potential to have
a negative effect on competition and social welfare. Therefore, it constitutes an
important element in any policy to fight cartels.
2. Cease and Desist Agreement (TCC)18
A Cease and Desist Agreement (TCC, in its acronym in Portuguese), foreseen in
article 85 of Law 12529/2011 and art. 219 through 236 of the Statutes of CADE, is
an agreement that may be signed between CADE and companies and/or
individuals who are not eligible to sign Leniency Agreements. In this case, the
agreement is made when the investigation into the illegal behaviour is already
significance of the leniency program. In fact, a leniency program properly structured and used by
an antitrust authority naturally produces an instability in running cartels and decreases the
advantage of joining or forming a new coordinated anticompetitive group, since it weakens the
trustworthy relationship between participants and encourages the reporting of any ongoing
anticompetitive conduct to the Official Authority. For more information on this matter, see: OCDE.
Recommendation of the Council concerning Effective Action against Hard Core Cartels (2009).
Available at: <https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0452>.
17Provided for in art. 86 and 87 of the Brazilian Competition Law and in art. 237 through 251 of the
Statutes of CADE.
18For further information on TCCs, see: Guidelines: Cease and Desist Agreement for cartel cases.
Portuguese version available at: <http://www.cade.gov.br/acesso-a-informacao/publicacoes-
institucionais/guias_do_Cade/guia-tcc-versao-final.pdf>. English version available at:
<http://www.cade.gov.br/acesso-a-informacao/publicacoes-
institucionais/guias_do_Cade/guidelines_tcc-1.pdf/view>.
14in progress19 and, unlike the Leniency Agreement, it comes with no advantages
for signatories in criminal proceedings.
Similar to what happens in the Leniency Agreement, the signatories of TCCs must
also confess to their participation in the conduct, and collaborate20 with
investigations by providing CADE with reports containing relevant information
and documents that can be used to identify or confirm the identity of other
persons or companies involved in the conduct, and are evidence of the
conduct21.
Any party who enters into a TCC with CADE receives a discount that can reach
up to 50% of the expected fine in case of conviction. In addition, signing the TCC
results in a halt in the investigations into any signatories, while the terms
established in the agreement are fulfilled; consequently, signatories have to
comply with the established obligations, including immediately ceasing their
participation in the conduct under investigation.
TCCs are important mechanisms in the prosecution of cartels, as they add new
information and documents to what has been obtained with the Leniency
Agreement, and confirm information already known by the antitrust authority,
strengthening investigations and any respective administrative proceedings.
3. Complaints and the Clique-Denúncia Platform for Reporting
Violations
19We would like to emphasize that the Leniency Agreement may be signed during the course of
the proceedings. However, this can only happen by means of a Partial Leniency Agreement that
grants the Petitioner reduction of one to two thirds of the applicable penalty, as per the provisions
of art. 86, section 4 of Law 12529/2011.
20Regarding collaboration, it is necessary to stress that TCCs signed in more advanced stages of
proceedings – as is the case, for example, if an Administrative Proceeding is already at the Tribunal
– have little or almost no chance of adding relevant information to the case. Its main use, in terms
of cost reduction, would be achieved by means of an early conclusion of the proceeding,
avoiding future legal disputes.
21A TCC may be signed both with the General Superintendence and the Administrative Tribunal,
with some specificities arising from the procedural moment in which the agreement has been
signed.
15The General Superintendence of CADE (SG/CADE) may also, depending on the
amount of proof and evidence, choose to launch a Preliminary Inquiry, an
Administrative Investigation or an Administrative Proceeding on the basis of a
reasoned complaint by any interested party which provides evidence of an
economic crime (article 66, section 1 of Law 12529/2011).
Members of the Brazilian National Congress, or of any of its Chambers, as well as
members of the Secretariat of Competition Advocacy and Competitiveness
(SEAE) linked to the Ministry of Economy, of regulatory agencies and of the Office
of the Attorney General at CADE, in accordance to the provisions of article 66,
section 6 of the Competition Law, are also eligible informers.
In addition to complaints, CADE has a tool for reporting violations, the Clique-
Denúncia platform22, which is a basically an integrated Electronic Information
System, which any and every citizen can access to blow the whistle in case of
knowledge of an economic crime23.
The best way for citizens to report a violation to the General
Superintendence of CADE is through the Clique-Denúncia platform. The
reporting form is available at: http://www.cade.gov.br/
You can also contact the SG/CADE on the telephone number: +55 61 3221
8445
Reports may be a nonymous and CADE guarantees absolute secrecy about the
identity of whistle-blowers should it be requested.
4. Search and Seizure
The possibility of the Superintendence of CADE carrying out a search and seizure
is provided for in article 13, section 6(d) of Law 12529/2011. Search and seizures
are crucial due to the difficulty of obtaining evidence in investigations into
cartels, and because there is an element of surprise which prevents the spoliation
of evidence.
22Available at:
<https://sei.cade.gov.br/sei/modulos/cliquedenuncia/formulario_denuncia.php?acao_externa=
denuncia&acao_origem_externa=denuncia&id_orgao_acesso_externo=0&id_orgao_acesso_ext
erno=0> (form for reporting a violation only available in Portuguese), or
<http://en.cade.gov.br/report_a_violation> (information in English on how to report a violation by
e-mail).
23The Clique-Denúncia platform can be used by any citizen to file reports related to cartel activity,
other anticompetitive practices, and mergers and acquisitions.
165. Economic Analysis and Screening
The General Superintendence of CADE also uses proactive tools for detecting
cartels, such as screening. Screening is the use of data base, software and
statistical testing applications to identify and measure any collusion risk in specific
markets or sectors and to detect suspicious behaviour by respective economic
agents.
1.2 Other authorities responsible for investigating and penalizing cartel conduct
and other related infractions: fighting cartels in procurements in the
administrative, criminal and civil domains, related infractions, and competent
authorities
The Brazilian legal system defines a cartel as an antitrust offense, as per the
provisions of Law 12529/2011, previously detailed. Therefore, in the administrative
domain, cartels are investigated as anticompetitive conduct, e.g. a violation
that negatively affects free competition is investigated and an administrative
proceeding is launched by the Superintendence of CADE (article 13, section 5
of Law 12529/2011) and is later tried in the Tribunal of CADE (article 9, section 3
of Law 12529/2011) which may impose fines to individuals and companies, in
addition to other penalties established by Law.
17ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
Cartel in procurements as anticompetitive conduct – Law 12529/2011
Law 125 29/2011
(Competition Law)
Art. 36. It is considered an economic crime, regar dless of fault, each and every practice carried out
anyhow, intended to or which can have the following effects, even if not successful:
Section 3. The following conducts, among others, insofar as they have been provided for in the head
of this article or in its sections, are considered economic crimes:
Section 1. agreeing, combining, manipulating or colluding with competitors, by any means:
a) the prices of goods or services individually offe red;
b) the production or trade of a restricted or limited amount of goods, or the provision of a restricted
or limited amount, quantity or frequency of services;
c) the division of parts or segments of a current o r potential market for goods or services, by means
of, amongst others, dividing customers, suppliers , regions or periods;
d) the prices, conditions, advantages or non-par ticipation in government procurements.
Administrative Council for Economic Defense – CADE
General Superintendence: investigates the practice, launches the Administrative
Proceeding into a cartel in a procurement, and issues a Technical Opinion
recommending whether the case should be thrown out or go to trial.
Tribunal of CADE: tries the case and imposes fines and other applicable penalties,
including, in the case of cartels in procurements, the prohibition of participating in
government procurements for a period of five years.
Cartel conduct is also considered an economic crime, as per the provisions of
article 4 of Law 8317/1990, and in the criminal domain, is investigated by the
police and Prosecution Services. In this case, individuals involved in the practice
are liable to fines and imprisonment for a period of two through five years, which
may be increased by one third up to one half should the crime be considered
especially harmful to society, be committed by a civil servant or be related to
essential goods or healthcare and life services.
Furthermore, cases of cartels in government procurements can also be
considered crimes as per the provisions of article 90 of Law 8666/1993. Individuals
involved in the practice are subject to fine and imprisonment for a period of two
to four years.
18CRIMINAL LAW
Cartels in procurements as an economic crime (Law 8137/1990) and as a
crime that negatively affects procurements and acquisitions by the
Government (Law 8666/1993)
Law 8137/1990
Economic Crimes Law Law 8666/1993
Procurement Law
Art. 4. It is considered an economic crime:
Section 2. agreements, covenants, Art. 90. Frustrate or defraud, by means
adjustments or partnerships between of adjustment, combination or any other
competitors, aimed at: means, the competitive nature of
a) artificially fixing prices or amounts sold or procurements, in order to obtain, for
produced; oneself or for others, advantage resulting
b) the regionalized control of the market by a from the award of the object of the
company or group of companies; procurement.
c) the control of the distribution network or Penalty – imprisonment for a period of 2
suppliers, considered harmful to competition. to 4 years, and a fine.
Penalty – imprisonment for a period of 2 to 5
years, and a fine.
Prosecution Services and the Police
As it is considered a crime, the Police and Prosecution Services are responsible for investigating
and bringing to criminal courts any cases related to cartels.
Judicial Branch
Therefore, if the Prosecution Services understand that a crime has been committed, the case
will be taken to the judiciary. Once the judiciary Is aware of the situation, criminal proceedings
are launched to be tried and decided by the competent judge.
Furthermore, the members of a cartel are also liable in the civil domain, subject
to lawsuits for damages caused by the cartel conduct, which may be filed by
any party harmed by the cartel, according to the provisions of article 47 of Law
12529/2011, as well as to civil actions by the Prosecution Services and other
authorised agents.
19CIVIL LAW
Damages to the Treasury and private individuals
Brazilian Federal Constitution of 1988
Art. 37. Direct and autonomous government bodies of any of the branches of the Federal, State and
Local Governments, as well as the Government of the Federal District, shall observe the principles of
legality, impersonality, morality, publicity and efficiency, as well as the following:
Section 4. Malfeasance in office shall result in the suspension of political rights, just cause removal
from office, blocked assets and compensation for damages to the Treasury, in the form and pace
provided for by law, notwithstanding any other applicable penalties.
Section 5. The Law shall establish the statute of limitations for violations, practiced by any agent, civil
servant or not, resulting in damages to the Treasury, except for the respective compensation actions.
Law 12529/2011
(Competition Law)
Art. 47. Anyone that has been harmed, by oneself or by any parties referred to in art. 82 of Law 8078,
of 11 September 1990, shall file a lawsuit, in defense of their individual interests or homogeneous
individual rights, to have the economic crime stopped and receive compensation for losses and
damages suffered, regardless of any ongoing administrative investigation or proceeding, which shall not
be suspended due to the filing of a lawsuit.
Law 7347/1985
Law 8429/1992
(Civil Action)
(Malfeasance in Office)
The compensation for damages to the
Malfeasance in office, in addition to
Treasury are liable to civil lawsuit (art. 1,
penalising the government agent that
section 5), which can be requested by the
committed the crime, is aimed at
affected government body (the Federal
compensating the damages caused to
Government, as well as State and Local
the Treasury.
Governments, and the Government of the
This action is filed by the Prosecution
Federal District; agencies, state
Services.
enterprises, foundations and private
companies controlled by the government),
as well as by the Prosecution Services.
Civil Action (Law 10406/2002)
(Compensation)
Compensation is provided for in article 927, which establishes that
“whoever causes losses to another by unlawful conduct is obliged to
compensate the other party for it.”
20It is important to emphasize that the conduct legally considered as cartel activity
before the antitrust authority may also constitute different administrative
violations, which can be analysed and investigated by other authorities,
especially control agencies.
This happens because each authority, as well as the respective laws, are
responsible for different legal matters; the same conduct can affect different
legal assets and therefore be subject to the competence of different authorities.
In other words, the Antitrust Law protects legal interests related to competition;
the Anticorruption Law protects the Government; the Federal Court of Accounts
Law is aimed at controlling and protecting government accounts; the
Procurement Law protects the fairness of procurement processes carried out by
the Government. Therefore, cartels in procurements, as a mean to restrict the
competitive nature of a procurement, affect many different legal interests, thus,
this sort of conduct can be investigated and punished in accordance with the
provisions of other laws.
In this context, the Brazilian Federal Court of Accounts (TCU), for instance, in its
role of overseeing government budgets, has a duty to monitor government
procurement processes and acquisitions, and, should any fraud be detected in
a procurement, the Court has the power to determine the ineligibility of bidders,
and request the rendering of accounts, should it be determined that there were
losses to the Treasury (art. 41, 46 and 47 of Law 8443/1992).
On the other hand, the Office of the Comptroller General of Brazil (CGU) is the
control body in charge of investigating, prosecuting and trying unlawful
practices that threaten public assets, including attempting to frustrate or defraud
the competitive nature of procurements (article 5, section 4, and article 9 of Law
12846/2013).
With regards to Anticorruption Law, the Office of the Attorney General of Brazil
(AGU) may require the blocking of assets or funds necessary to ensure the
payment of fines or compensation for damages (article 19, section 4 of Law
12846/2013). At last, it is important to emphasize that the Office of the Attorney
General is authorised to file Civil Actions aimed at receiving damages for any
losses suffered.
21ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
Cartels in procurements according to the provisions of Law 12846/2013
Law 12846/2013
(Anticorruption Law)
Art. 5. For the purposes of this Law, is it consi dered a harmful practice for national or foreigner
Governments, all conducts by legal entities, mentioned in art. 1, section 1, that threaten national or
foreigner public assets, Government principles, or international commitments made by Brazil, and
are defined as follows:
Section 4. with regard to procurements and acquisitions:
a) frustrating or defrauding, by means of adjustment, agreement or any other means, the
competitive nature of government procurements;
Office of the Comptroller General of Brazil (CGU)
CGU has power to investigate, prosecute and try any unlawful behaviour listed in
the anticorruption law, such as fraud in procurements which may be related to
agreements between bidding companies (art. 9 of Law 12846/2013).
Office of the Attorney General of Brazil and Prosecution Services
The Attorney General and Official Legal Services Providers/Prosecution Services
may require the blocking of assets or funds necessary to ensure the payment of
fines or compensation for damages (art. 19 of Law 12846/2013).
As aforementioned, the same conduct considered an antitrust violation may be
classified as different administrative violations, of which it seems important to
mention fraud in government procurements, corruption and managerial
wrongdoing. The differences and correlation between such practices are
detailed in the last section of this Guide, which is dedicated to crimes related to
cartels.
22PART II - DETECTING CARTELS IN PROCUREMENTS: ENABLERS,
FORMS OF COLLUSION AND EVIDENCE
II.1. Which aspects enable cartel formation? Characteristics of
government procurement markets favourable for the creation of
cartels, and for the monitoring of cartels in procurement processes
Some particularities of the government procurement market, in Brazil and
abroad, have major implications for both the prevention and the fight against
cartels in government procurements. Amongst the main structural elements of
government acquisitions which facilitate cartel formation as well as the
monitoring by cartel members24, it is worth mentioning:
(I) Consistency of products and services, absence of substitutes and minor
technological changes: when products and services to be acquired have minor
or no difference amongst them, it is easier to come to an agreement, because
the members of a cartel will need to define together only one variable which
can be easily controlled and measured: price. This is particularly common in
government acquisitions because in most procurements there are no significant
quality and/or technological differences amongst products and services to be
acquired, as most procurements are for common goods and services. Besides,
when there are few substitutes for a product, or yet, when a product does not
involve major changes in terms of technology, companies are more confident of
the success of their agreement and are sure it will last for a longer time.
(II) Market conditions, stability of demand and recurrence of government
procurements: significant alterations in demand or in supply conditions tend to
destabilize possible collusive agreements in course. On the other hand, a
constant and predictable demand by the Government increases the risk of
collusion. The consequence of this – in addition to companies having access to
the term of current contracts – is the facility to make agreements and arrange
possible future rewards, or even to maintain long-term agreements, since it
reduces the costs involved in monitoring cartel activity and makes it easier to
discipline any potential deviant behaviour.
24 See: OECD. Competition and Procurement (2011); and OECD. Guidelines for Fighting Bid Rigging
in Public Procurement: helping governments to obtain best value for money (2009). Both available
at: <www.ocde.org/competition>.
23(III) Maintenance of notice provisions: the recurrent need to contract services
and purchase products for government maintenance leads officials responsible
for procurements to maintain notice provisions unaltered over time, thus
reproducing the content of notices in several consecutive procurements, which
brings predictability to the interaction amongst competitors and stability to the
terms that support the collusive agreement.
(IV) Transparency: information related to government procurements are public
by nature, as a result of the constitutional provision that requires disclosure of all
administrative processes, and is a necessary mechanism for effective oversight
of government activities. However, it also allows companies unrestricted access
to commercial information that, in private markets, are considered commercially
sensitive data. In government procurements, companies know the prices
charged by competitors (commercial proposals), technical and quality
characteristics of the products and services offered (government notice rules
and qualification documents), costs (price breakdown spreadsheets),
commercial strategies (record of participation in government procurements),
contract portfolio (supporting experience documentation), amongst other
information. In this sense, such structural characteristics reduce the costs involved
in monitoring and disciplining deviant behaviour by the companies participating
in the anticompetitive agreement.
(V) Restricted number of competitors: the probability of collusion in government
procurements increases when there is only a few number of companies with
technical and economic capacity to provide the good or service. The fewer the
number of agents in the market, the easier it is for them to enter into an
agreement.
(VI) Entry barriers: Should a market have high entry barriers (e.g. in case entering
a market is costly, difficult or slow), the companies in that market are protected
from competitive pressure by potential new competitors, which facilitates the
establishment and maintenance of collusive agreements, and allows cartel
members to abuse of their joint market power. In the case of government
acquisitions, reviewing entry barriers might involve, at times, reviewing the
respective procurement notices. Procurement notices are the documents that
establish the rules that will control the interaction amongst competitors (aspects
24related to price, quantity, quality, technology, execution deadline, contract
period, etc.} seeking to reproduce the competitive environment that, in theory,
would prevail in private markets. However, this reproduction is faulty, since the
government procurement notices have provisions that exclude some potential
competitors (due to requirements related to prior experience, technical
expertise, technical qualification, fulfilment of tax liabilities, etc.), therefore, being
effectively an entry barrier.
(VII) Necessity of a successful procurement: the difficulty the Government faces
to react to significant price increases (because it is not feasible, to cancel and/or
postpone the contracting of certain goods and services), makes price fixing at
supra competitive levels, in several procurements, a viable and successful
strategy, leaving the Government at the mercy of artificial conditions established
by bidders.
(VIII) Frequent interactions between bidders: another aspect that facilitates
collusion is the existence of markets in which contact between bidders are
frequent and continuous. Whether because the same companies usually
participate of a great amount of procurements in that market or because they
interact through associations or events in the field. Such contacts facilitate the
establishment of a common strategy, as well as the monitoring and disciplining
deviant behaviour by cartel members. In Brazil, where procurements are
decentralized (each management unit carries out its own procurement
processes to meet its needs), the frequency of contact between companies in
certain sectors can be quite meaningful.
II.2. Difficulties in detecting cartels in government procurements and
the importance of circumstantial evidence
In order to prove the existence of collusive agreements, the antitrust authority
may use both direct (documents that prove the material existence of the
agreement between bidders) and circumstantial evidence25. Due to the
25Article 239 of the Brazilian Criminal Code defines circumstantial evidence as a set of stated
incidents – even if at random – which may, by induction, allow for the inference that a crime has
been committed.
25difficulty of obtaining direct evidence, circumstantial evidence is an important
mean for proving there are agreements in place.
During investigations into cartels in government procurements, the use of
circumstantial evidence is common, especially concerning suspicious behaviour
of participants that deviate from what would be expected in a regular
procurement, in which competition amongst competitors actually happens. E.g.:
proposals with similar errors, rotation of winning bidders amongst competitors,
and the existence of pattern in the price margin of the proposals presented.
Circumstantial evidence result from active interpretation (e.g. logical inferences,
economic reviews and deductions) by the authority, of facts and evidence that,
taken together, might prove the anticompetitive conduct, since no other
plausible explanation can account for such behaviour by the investigated
parties26.
On the one hand, cartel participants that have direct evidence of an
agreement, make a lot of effort to keep the conduct a secret. On the other
hand, antitrust authorities face all these strategies adopted by cartel members
to destroy and tamper with evidence27 by making use of circumstantial
evidences which play an important role in proving the existence of collusive
agreements, as seen in international precedent.
GLOBAL USE OF CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE
The Department of Justice of the United States, the body responsible for the
criminal prosecution of antitrust conduct in the United States, has already
suggested convicting cartels in government procurements based on
circumstantial evidence1. There are, yet, other precedents that support the
possibility of using circumstantial evidence in cases of investigations into collusive
agreements:
Indeed, it is axiomatic that the typical conspiracy is "rarely
evidenced by explicit agreements," but must almost always be
proved by "inferences that may be drawn from the behaviour of
26CONSIDERA, C., DUARTE, G.F.S. A Importância de Evidências Econômicas para a Investigação
de Cartéis: A Experiência Brasileira (Universidade Federal Fluminense, 2005).
27GUERRIN, M., KYRIAZISYM, G. Cartels: Proof and Procedural Issues (1992), p. 266.
26the alleged conspirators." Thus, an antitrust plaintiff may prove
the existence of a combination or conspiracy by providing either
direct or circumstantial evidence sufficient to "warrant a . . .
finding that the conspirators had a unity of purpose or common
design and understanding, or a meeting of the minds in an
unlawful arrangement".2
The European antitrust authority also agrees to the use of circumstantial
evidence to prosecute cartels3. See, for instance, an excerpt from the decision
of the European Court of Justice in the case of Aalborg Portland A/S and others
v. Commission, which reviews an appeal against the decision of the European
Commission that convicted a cartel in the European cement market4.
Since the prohibition on participating in anti-competitive
agreements and the penalties which offenders may incur are
well known, it is normal for the activities which those practices
and those agreements entail to take place in a clandestine
fashion, for meetings to be held in secret, most frequently in a
non-member country, and for the associated documentation to
be reduced to a minimum.
Even if the Commission discovers evidence explicitly showing
unlawful contact between traders, such as the minutes of a
meeting, it will normally be only fragmentary and sparse, so that
it is often necessary to reconstitute certain details by deduction.
In most cases, the existence of an anti-competitive practice or
agreement must be inferred from a number of coincidences and
indicia which, taken together, may, in the absence of another
plausible explanation, constitute evidence of an infringement of
the competition rules.5
The international literature also follows the same approach. The OECD collected
information on the use of circumstantial evidence by different antitrust
authorities. Amongst the main conclusions, the following stand out:
2. The better practice is to use circumstantial evidence
holistically, giving its cumulative effect, rather than on an item-
by-item basis. (…)
4. There are two general types of circumstantial evidence:
communication evidence and economic evidence. Of the two,
communication evidence is considered to be the more
important.6
Furthermore, it is also important to note that, according to the Anti-Cartel
Enforcement Manual prepared by the International Competition Network7, the
way in which each jurisdiction determines the evidence necessary to prove the
27existence of cartels differs. However, regardless of whether the evidence
reviewed is direct or circumstantial, it is necessary to observe the following
evidence, amongst others:
1 – Evidence that indicates prior knowledge of information about
prices or bids given by a competitor;
2 – Evidence that indicates competitors have discussed bids or
have come to an agreement regarding their bids;
3 – Evidence of monitoring of agreements;
4 – Evidence that a particular customer or contract is exclusive
for a specific company;
1United States v Champion International Corporation Case, 557 F.2d 1270 (9th Cir. 1977),
related to cartel in government procurements for the sale of timber. See: OECD.
Prosecuting Cartels without Direct Evidence (2006), p.174.
2ES Development, Inc. v. RWM Enterprises, Inc., 939 F.2d 547 (1991). United States Court of
Appeals for the Eighth Circuit. Available at: <https://cite.case.law/f2d/939/547/>.
Retrieved:22 Sep 2020.
3See, for instance, the decision of the European Court Justice on the “Dyestuffs Case”
(ICI vs Commission, Case 48/69, 1972, §§66-68). Available at: <https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:61969CJ0048&from=EN>.
Retrieved: 3 May 2013.
4Cases IV/33.126 and 33.322 – Cement. Available at: <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:31994D0815&from=EN>, Retrieved: 3 May 2013.
5Aalborg Portland A/S and others v Commission (Joined Cases C-204/00 P, C-205/00 P,
C-211/00 P, C-213/00 P, C-217/00 P and C-219/00 P). Available at:
<http://curia.europa.eu/juris/showPdf.jsf;jsessionid=9ea7d0f130d58a5500806a
674a49b719cceb5a3d6dae.e34KaxiLc3eQc40LaxqMbN4Oah0Se0?text=&docid=48825
&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=lst&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=299626>.
Retrieved: 3 May 2013.
6See: OCDE. Prosecuting Cartels without Direct Evidence (2006), p. 9-11.
7See: ICN. Anti-Cartel Enforcement Manual (2008), p. 13.
THE SOLAR HEATER CASE
(Administrative Proceeding 08012.001273/2010-24)
CASE SUMMARY
The Administrative Proceeding was launched in 2012 to investigate an alleged
cartel in government procurements for the acquisition of solar heaters for low-
income houses built by the Housing and Urban Development Company of the
State of São Paulo (CDHU).
28The investigation showed some companies combined prices and divided the
market in procurements for the acquisition of solar heaters by CDHU; such
agreements were implemented by means of suspension/withdrawal of proposals
in procurements – in addition to a regular rotation of winning bidders for several
lots – and the use of the strategy commonly known as bidder collusion in in-
person reverse auction.
The case was tried by the Tribunal of CADE in 2015. A majority decided for the
conviction of all companies involved, and threw out the case against an
association and two individuals. In addition to imposing a fine, the Tribunal also
decided for the imposition a nonmonetary penalty: the inclusion of the
companies in the Brazilian Consumer Protection Registry (Cadastro Nacional de
Defesa do Consumidor) which was created as a means to keep track of
companies found guilty of economic crimes].
CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE
In this case, the use of circumstantial evidence was noteworthy because, taken
as a whole, they led to the conviction of the companies. Amongst the evidence,
it was particularly important the similarities observed in the prices listed in the
proposals submitted by different companies for lots in procurements. The
proposals (submitted in sealed envelopes), were at times completely identical –
to the cents – too remarkable to be by coincidence, as explained by the
Rapporteur of the case, Commissioner Márcio de Oliveira Júnior, in his vote:
310. (…) typical price and market agreements are followed by
manoeuvres in procurement processes aimed at emulating
competitiveness. Such actions are taken to conceal the
anticompetitive nature of the agreement, since an
anticompetitive agreement cannot be expected to be formally
written in a contract and signed. For this reason, the authorities
responsible for investigating and trying these cases must consider
different types of evidence to unveil a cartel.
311. Evidence must essentially show: (i) the similarities in the
behaviour of competitors in procurements, (ii) that companies
participating in the cartel won the desired lots or allowed a
company chosen by them to be the winner, (iii) there is a rotation
to lose or win lots based on cover biddings and bid
suppression/withdrawal, (iv) the existence of entry barriers, (v) the
existence of communication channels or transparency forums
that facilitate competitors to share information amongst them. In
29this sense, the type of evidence – whether direct or circumstantial
– is irrelevant, since the whole body of evidence is considered in
court rulings. What may be different in a case based on
circumstantial evidence from a classic case based on direct
evidence is the greatest effort required in the discovery and
examination to identify the elements that evince the economic
crime.
312. The case files indicated (i) the occurrence of price fixing and
bid suppression/withdrawal to favour cartel participants, (ii) the
winners of each lot were those chosen by the cartel, (iii) the
bidding phase was used for bid rotation for the Defendants to
simulate competition, (iv) entry barriers that favoured the offer of
products to larger companies, coincidentally, the size of the
companies on trial, (v) the Defendants used ABRAVA – the
Brazilian Association for Refrigeration, Air Conditioning,
Ventilation and Heating – to increase transparency in this market,
as the majority of companies that participated in the
procurement were part of it. (…)
314. In this Administrative Proceeding, I observed there are odd
coincidences related to the prices of several of the lots, which
similarities in the price of inputs (hereby considered as the goods
and services included in the lots) and the full homogeneity of all
aspects that shape the prices cannot account for. Neither was
there any explanation for how prices contained in sealed
envelopes for five different lots were similar, always including the
same company – Enalter –, which gave up its right to bid every
single time
Hence, it is clear the importance of circumstantial evidence, and its broad
acceptance by different antitrust authorities for investigating and understanding
how cartels operate.
It is important to observe that circumstantial evidence have no value separately,
at the risk of depreciating evidence, despite being a relevant indicator for the
detection of cartels by the authorities. The collected evidence must be assessed
as a whole, in order for evidence and circumstances to be interpreted at once,
making the valuation of such evidence an interpretive ruling.28 Thus, the conduct
of each company must be assessed both by comparing it with the conduct of
other competitors and with the situation of the market in question.29
Therefore, it is possible to state that, especially in the case of cartels in
government procurements, there are circumstances that, when reviewed
28ICI vs Commission, Case 48/69, 1972, §68.
29GUERRIN, M., KYRIAZISYM, G. Cartels: proof and procedural issues (1992), p. 266.
30together, indicate there is no other rational explanation for the behaviour of
bidders, except the existence of a previous anticompetitive agreement amongst
them; such evidence is fundamental for the detection and investigation of
cartels in procurements, especially considering the increasing difficulty of finding
any sort of direct evidence.
II.3. Types of collusion: the main strategies used by companies to form
cartels in procurements
Cartels in procurements may assume different forms, combining one or more
strategies in order to negotiate the illegal agreement. The strategies used by
cartel members, especially in government procurements, as a general rule,
involve reducing competition and artificially allocating contracts, in a private
manner, between companies that are supposed to be competing against each
other. In this sense, the simultaneous use of common strategies allows these
agents to completely define the market, by allocating everything from contract
portfolios, contracting agencies, geographical areas, though billing, amongst
other criteria, all of it aiming at distributing any additional profits resulting from
the reduction of competitive pressure.
II.3.1. Cover Bidding
Cover bidding (also known as cover pricing, and complementary or courtesy
bidding) is the most common way of establishing collusion schemes amongst
competitors. It is arranged to give an appearance that bidders are actually
competing against each other. This sort of arrangement happens when
individuals or companies agree on submitting proposals concerning at least one
of the following:
(1) One of the competitors agrees on submitting a proposal with prices higher
than the ones offered sin the proposal submitted by the bidder chosen to win the
procurement process;
(2) A competitor deliberately submits a proposal that is too overpriced to be
accepted; or
31(3) A competitor submits a proposal with specificities that are known to be
unacceptable to the purchaser.
Some real-life cases involving cover bidding are detailed below:
THE CARTEL CASE RELATED TO OUTSOURCED LAUNDRY SERVICES FOR
HOSPITALS IN RIO DE JANEIRO (OPERATION “DIRTY LAUNDRY”)
(Administrative Proceeding 08012.008850/2008-94)
CASE SUMMARY
The Administrative Proceeding was launched in 2008, and was aimed at
investigating a potential cartel to defraud government procurements for laundry
services for hospitals in Rio de Janeiro. The investigation showed that
representatives of companies operating in the sector, in several occasions,
engaged in phone calls and held in-person meetings aiming at sharing
commercial sensitive information such as prices, amounts of commercial
proposals, contract portfolios, etc. The purpose of these contacts was to work
towards agreements to divide the market division, submit cover bidding
proposals and impose entry barriers for potential new competitors. Additionally,
it was shown that their union operated to facilitate the establishment of these
agreement amongst companies.
The case was tried by the Tribunal of CADE in 2016. The Tribunal decided for the
conviction of all the defendants, with the exception of two individuals, one of
which because of a Cease and Desist Agreement.
COVER BIDDING
The use of the cover bidding strategy was evident in this case, for instance,
because of price lists including quoted prices and prices for “coverage” that had
to be higher than the winning one. The cover prices and even the sum of the
amounts defined for each participant of the agreement were established. Cover
bidding was one of the main strategies used for the implementation of the
anticompetitive agreement in procurements.
32FIGURE 130
FIGURE 231
INTERNATIONAL PRECEDENT
30Figure 1 is a piece of evidence which was attached to the case files of the public version of the
aforementioned Administrative Proceeding (§159 of the vote of the Rapporteur of the case,
Commissioner Ana Frazão). It details a cover bidding to be submitted by companies involved in
the collusion.
31Figure 2 is another piece of evidence which was attached to the case files of the public version
of the aforementioned Administrative Proceeding (§161 of the vote of the Rapporteur of the case,
Commissioner Ana Frazão). It is a price list detailing a new proposal for market division which
includes the prices to be submitted by cartel members in the proposals for each lot of the
procurement.
33THE CARTEL CASE RELATED TO MEDICAL DEVICES (INDIA)
CASE SUMMARY
The case concerns an anticompetitive conduct related to the manipulation of
procurement proposals for supplying, installing, testing and commissioning a
Modular Operation Theatre (MOT) and a Medical Gas Ammunition System
(MGMS) for the Sports Injury Centre (SIC) of the Safdarjung Hospital, in New Delhi.
The companies investigated were: (i) PES Installtions Pvt. Ltd. (PES); (ii) MDD
Medical Systems Pvt. Ltd. (MDD); and (iii) Medical Products Services (MPS).
COVER BIDDING
The Competition Commission of India (CCI), after assessing the proposal forms
submitted by the parties, stated that “not only was there the same typographical
error in the price calendar, but the same dates were also mentioned in the
various sections of the proposal forms submitted by PES and MDD. The Indian
antitrust authority also observed that the same typographical errors appeared in
the different proposals because the bidders shared printed copies of the price
calendar format amongst themselves to be able to prepare and file the bidding
documents together. Besides, according to the CCI, the coincidence of the
errors observed in the forms submitted by bidders indicated they colluded to
manipulate the procurement process. Therefore, the CCI concluded that the
three competitors had indeed an agreement and, according to what was
established in such agreement, PES and MPS submitted complementary
proposals that were incredibly overpriced in comparison with the proposal
submitted by MDD.
II.3.2. Bid suppression and bid withdrawal
The bid suppression strategies involve agreements amongst competitors for one
or more companies to refrain from competing or withdrawing previously
submitted proposals, so that the winner of the procurement is the bidder chosen
by the cartel.
34Therefore, the company can choose not to participate in the procurement from
the beginning (what we call bid suppression) or withdraw its proposal in the
middle of the process, in order for the other cartel member to win.
Two cases in which this strategy was used are detailed below:
THE DUCT CONSTRUCTION CARTEL IN SÃO PAULO
(Administrative Proceeding 08012.009885/2009-21)
CASE SUMMARY
The Administrative Proceeding was launched in 2010, based on a Petition
submitted by the Basic Sanitation Company of the State of São Paulo (SABESP),
which mentioned some alleged irregular behaviour by the companies SAENGE
and CONCIC in a procurement (International Request for Proposals CSO
53542/07).
The case was tried by the Tribunal of CADE in 2015. The Tribunal voted for the
conviction of all investigated parties, with the exception of a single individual.
BID SUPPRESSION
The bid suppression was evinced because, after winning the first phase, the
company CONCIC simply stopped submitting the documentation requested by
SABESP within the established deadline. After its disqualification from the
procurement, SAENGE was declared the winner.
Subsequently, SABESP became aware of the existence of a partnership
agreement between CONCIC and SAENGE, regarding the construction related
to the procurement process, which had been signed before the end of the
procurement process, when CONCIC was still in first place. Under the terms of
the “Private Partnership Agreement for Specific Purposes” (Instrumento Particular
de Constituição de Sociedade em Cotas de Participação de Propósito
Específico), the legal business was aimed at “the joint execution of the
construction works of Lot 3 of the Mambu/Branco Water Production System of
Baixada Santista”. Therefore, considering the withdrawal of the company that
was in first place resulted from the private agreement, and in view of the rest of
the evidence related to the nature of the contract, the moment it was signed
35and the economic incentives that motivated the agreement, the non-submission
by CONCIC of the documents required was considered as a suppression of its
initial proposal.
FIGURE 332
Private Agreement (p. 177)
INTERNATIONAL PRECEDENT
THE POWER CABLES CARTEL (EUROPEAN COMMISSION)
CASE SUMMARY
An investigation was launched because the main submarine and underground
power cable producers held meetings and engaged in bilateral and multilateral
talks, aiming at restricting competition in specific territories.
32Figure 3 can be found at page 177 of the public version of the case files of the aforementioned
Administrative Proceeding. The figure shows an excerpt of a clause of the private agreement,
which specifies the percentage of shares that would go for each company.
36BID SUPPRESSION
According to the decision of the European Commission, as of February 1999, the
main submarine and underground power cable producers allocated projects
according to geographical area and consumers. Additionally, information about
aspects such as prices was exchanged to ensure the winning bidder would be
the one chosen by the cartel. Thus, the chosen bidder would offer the lowest
price, while the others submitted higher offers, suppressed their offers or
submitted unattractive proposals in procurements.
The companies were also forced to share information, which allowed for the
monitoring of cartel members and ensured the fulfilment of the agreements.
Other actions were also taken in order to strengthen the cartel, such as a
collective refusal to provide accessories or technical assistance to certain
competitors.
II.3.3. Bidder collusion in in-person reverse auction
Bidder collusion in in-person reverse auction (bloqueio em pregão presencial) is
an anticompetitive strategy characterized by an agreement between a
company that supplies a specific good or service requested in a procurement
process and at least two other companies. In general, these companies are
involved in some sort of supply chain relationship. The purpose of this sort of
agreement is minimizing the chances of bidders who are not cartel members
passing to the bidding phase in an in-person reverse auction, thus restricting
competition in that procurement.
The in-person reverse auction is divided into two phases:
• Phase 1 or proposal phase: the proposals which will go through to the oral
bidding phase are selected, namely: the best proposal and those with
prices higher than the best proposal up to the limit of 10%. If there are not
at least two proposals that fit the criteria of being higher than the best
proposal up to the limit of 10%, the three best proposals are selected for
the oral bidding phase;
37• Phase 2: the oral bidding phase33, the procurement’s peak competitive
phase, takes place. All of those who passed to this phase become aware
of the prices offered by the others and start to openly compete for the
contract. Therefore, this phase allows, when there is actual competition for
the contract, the Government is able to obtain the most advantageous
price proposal, which results in savings for the Treasury34.
Thus, when using such strategy, cartel members are aware of the proposals of
one another, and one of them submits a competitive proposal with a lower price,
while the others submit proposals with prices within the 10% mark. These proposals
are considered cover biddings35. The expectation is that only cartel members
pass to the oral bidding phase. With this strategy, companies that are not
participating in the collusion – whose proposals do not fall within the 10% range
from the best proposal – may be artificially prevented from participating in the
oral bidding phase, thus effectively removing competition in this phase of the
reverse auction. Consequently, the cartel members that pass to the bidding
phase, fail to submit new proposals or submit fake proposals with only a small
price reduction.
Restriction of competition in reverse auctions is agreed upon because, in the
absence of collusion amongst companies, proposals with values above the
range of 10% would pass to the bidding phase, ensuring actual competition in
the second phase of reverse auctions.36
Bidder collusion in in-person reverse auctions does not always ensure that a cartel
win the reverse auction, since other competitors may submit proposals with
prices lower or within the 10% range, thus passing to the oral bidding phase. In
33In the form of a reverse auction, with successive and decreasing bids.
34After the bidding phase, and the selection of the best proposal by the criterion of best price, the
eligibility of the company in first place is verified more quickly than in other types of procurement.
In case the first placed is not deemed eligible, the eligibility of the company in second place is
assessed. Both phases are crucial for the Government not to simply obtain the proposal with the
best price, but the most advantageous one.
35Opinion 10/2016/CGEP/PFE-CADE-CADE/PGF/AGU. Proceeding 08012.009645/2008-46,
launched based on the Petition submitted by CMW Saúde e Tecnologia Importação e Exportação
Ltda., informing that Support Produtos Nutricionais Ltda., supplier of “food for special medical
purposes”, had allegedly sold goods below the cost price, and fixed or practiced, in agreement
with competitors, prices and conditions for the sale of goods in government procurements.
36The strategy of bidder collusion does not apply to electronic reverse auctions, since in this type of
procurement all companies with proposals qualified on the first phase can participate on the
competitive phase, in which bids are presented (art. 23 of Ruling 5450/2005).
38any case, collusion has a significant anticompetitive potential, since it deals with
agreements amongst competitors involving variables such as prices and
quantities that are considered competitively sensitive and must be assessed by
CADE.
THE CARTEL CASE RELATED TO THE ACQUISITION OF PAINTS
(Administrative Proceeding 08012.006199/2009-07)
CASE SUMMARY
The Administrative Proceeding was launched in 2012 to investigate a cartel in a
government procurement (in-person reverse auction) organized by the City Hall
of Lages (Prefeitura de Lages), in Santa Catarina, for the acquisition of painting
and hydraulic materials.
The case was tried by the Tribunal of CADE in 2014, which voted for the conviction
of three of the investigated companies and the imposition of a fine and
compliance with ancillary obligations.
BIDDER COLLUSION IN IN-PERSON REVERSE AUCTION
Despite the relative lack of direct evidence, there was a robust set of evidence
consisting mainly of economic evidence of parallel pricing and circumstantial
evidence such as the visually identical proposals, which had the same spelling
errors and similarities in both formatting and wording.
Such evidence proved the collusion in in-person reverse auctions, since the
companies, by submitting identical prices or similar ranges to those of the initial
proposals, aimed precisely at ensuring that, besides the company chosen by the
cartel to be the winner of the procurement, at least one of the other two
companies passed to the bidding phase. In some cases, when the use of this
strategy allowed the three cartelists to pass to the bidding phase, two of them
simulated competition and ended up giving up bidding for the benefit of the
company chosen by the cartel to be the winner, thus effectively turning the
bidding phase useless. In other cases, when bidders that were not part of the
cartel passed to the bidding phase, the offenders worked on behalf of their
chosen winner and against the newcomer, in order to “block” other potential
competitors from submitting proposals that were actually more advantageous
39to the Government. This strategy was used by the members of the cartel. This way
the companies that passed to the bidding phase did not face competitive
pressure from other bidders that had not passed to this phase.
II.3.4. Bid rotation
In the bid rotation scheme, the cartel members continue to compete, but agree
to take turns submitting the winning proposal, either for different lots in the same
procurement or for different procurements, so that each member of the cartel
would have a “share”. In other words, it is a form of market division.
The way in which bid rotation is implemented may vary. The division can be done
in equal amounts (same number of lots) or, for instance, in proportion to the size,
market share or productive capacity of each company.
THE CARTEL CASE RELATED TO SECURITY REVOLVING DOORS
(Administrative Proceeding 08012.009611/2008-51)
CASE SUMMARY
The Administrative Proceeding was launched in 2008 to investigate a cartel in
government procurements organised by Banco do Brasil and Banrisul for the
acquisition of metal detector doors.
The case was tried in 2014 and the Tribunal voted for the conviction of 4
companies and 10 individuals.
BID ROTATION
The cartel members took turns submitting winning proposals, which was evinced
by the conversations they had to discuss which company would win each
procurement, based on previous wins. The strategy of bid rotation was also
facilitated by the use of tables to keep track of the ranking of each member of
the cartel, in order to determine the order in which each company would win
future procurements.
40FIGURE 437
II.3.5. Market division
The strategy of market division involves a scheme to submit proposals with the
intent to somehow divide the market amongst the members of the cartel. The
division may refer to, for example, customer portfolio (several government
bodies), type of product/service, or geographic market (region/city/state, etc.).
This strategy can be closely related to other aforementioned strategies, such as
bid rotation, cover bidding, or bid suppression. Competing companies may, for
example, assign specific customers or types of customers to different companies,
so that other competitors do not submit proposals (or only submit fake proposals)
in procurements carried out by these potential customers. In return, the
competitor does not present competitive proposals to other specific groups of
customers, which were assigned to other members of the cartel.
37Figure 4 is a piece of evidence showing a chat conversation amongst bidders in which they are
seen discussing prices agreements. It can be found at page 147 of the public case files of the
Administrative Proceeding.
41THE CASE OF THE INTERNATIONAL CARTEL OF MARINE HOSES
(Administrative Proceeding 08012.010932/2007-18)
CASE SUMMARY
The Administrative Proceeding was launched in 2007 after the signing of a
Leniency Agreement concerning an alleged international cartel with effects in
Brazil on the market of rubber marine hoses.
The case was tried in 2015 and the Tribunal decided for the conviction of three
companies and one individual and for dismissing the case against three
companies and four individuals. In addition, four Cease and Desist Agreements
were signed, which resulted in the dismissal of the case against the signatories.
MARKET DIVISION
The cartel was highly institutionalised and governed by rules of conduct and
discipline provisions for anyone those who circumvented the agreement. It also
had a “technical committee”, made up of the main members of the cartel,
which was aimed at scrutinising and specifying rules.
According to the “technical committee”, the cartel should be organised by a
coordinator and aim at: (i) maximizing prices and profits, (ii) ensuring that the
winning bidder would effectively win, using cover biddings, (iii) exchanging
information about price, quantity, market share, and other competitively
sensitive information, (iv) monitoring compliance with the agreement and
enforcing discipline amongst members, especially with regard to “project”
allocation and punishment for members who violated the rules, and ( v) reducing
transaction costs related to attracting customers and sales strategies.
The cartel coordinator was responsible for setting the rules to be followed by the
members and monitoring the compliance with the market share agreed by the
companies. This person was entrusted with the task of resolving conflicts amongst
participants and seeking cover biddings (which they called “support”) for the
winner appointed by the cartel (the "champion").
In structural terms, such cover biddings were designed based on market shares,
supply records, and operation of factories. Regarding the anticompetitive
conduct, the cover biddings were also drawn up based on a company’s record
42of compliance with the agreement, a division of the market intended to ensure
specific market shares, and a balance of gains and losses amongst competitors.
FIGURE 538
INTERNATIONAL PRECEDENT
THE CARTEL CASE RELATED TO PIPES WITH THERMAL INSULATION
(BELGIUM)
CASE SUMMARY
The case was launched to investigate an alleged cartel on the market of pipes
with thermal insulation.
MARKET DIVISION
At the end of the year 1990, four Danish producers signed an agreement for
general cooperation in their domestic market and, as of the fall of 1991, two
German producers started to participate regularly in the meetings. According to
the European Commission, it was within this context that negotiations occurred,
38Figure 5 is a piece of evidence attached to the public version of the opinion of the Rapporteur
of the case, Commissioner Márcio de Oliveira Júnior, §269. It is a document evincing an agreement
of international repercussion amongst cartelists.
43which, in 1994, led to an agreement to allocate shares for the entire European
market. These shares were allocated to each company by a team of directors
(the presidents or CEOs of the companies participating in the cartel), both at the
European and national levels. These countries included Germany, Austria,
Denmark, Finland, Italy, the Netherlands, and Sweden.
In 1995, the Swedish company Powerpipe AB (the only large company that did
not participate in the cartel) reported the case to the Commission, complaining
that its activities in the domestic market were being hampered. In 1998, the
Commission concluded there were a number of agreements and practices
aimed at dividing the national market amongst producers and, more precisely,
to hinder the activities of the direct competitor Powerpipe AB. A Danish cartel
went on to became a European cartel with considerable effects on intra-
community trade.
II.3.6. Other strategies: legal mechanisms used to implement
anticompetitive strategies
a) Consortia
Article 33 of Law 8666/1993 includes the legal authorization for the establishment
of consortia in government procurements, which is an important mechanism for
increasing competitiveness in procurements, particularly in the case of large
contracts, in which a company alone would not be able to provide the good or
service requested.
However, according to Marçal Justen Filho, even though there are some cases
in which consortia contribute to increase the number of participants, particularly
in procurements involving complex markets or products/services, the
establishment of consortia may reduce the range of competitors and make it
easier for potential interested parties to negotiate agreements with one another.
It is important to mention that consortia are legitimate instruments and sometimes
the only possible way to purchase the needed products or services. In some
cases, they are essential to widen the range of the process, allowing smaller
companies to compete with those with more capacity and/or the leaders of a
market or sector. Nonetheless, this instrument, when used for something other
than its intended purpose, may be harmful to procurement competition or even
be used to implement anticompetitive agreements.
This happens because in certain cases consortia can create distortions intended
to ensure a previously-agreed division of the market between competitors.
Consider this example: in a given procurement process, there are five companies
44with technical and financial capacity to separately provide the requested
service or product. However, they illegally discuss the possibility of creating a
consortium and agree on who will be awarded the contract and what
companies will formally propose the consortium. In this case, it is dangerous to
competition and to the Treasury because the companies will submit proposals
with higher prices than they would have submitted in a scenario in which they
faced actual competition. This is made even worse by the fact that three
companies will have submitted cover bids.
This strategy was seen in the Train Cartel case39, tried in July 2019. In his opinion,
the Rapporteur of the case, Commissioner João Paulo Resende, stressed
consortia are allowed by law and their existence alone does not imply any
wrongdoing. Nevertheless, it may be used in a twisted way, resulting in what he
called "shell consortia", which "reduce the competition in a procurement since
potential competitors suppress their individual bids and divide parts of the
product or service requested in order to give shares to the members of
consortium, ultimately dividing the market between these companies".
In this regard, procuring bodies, when drafting procurement notices or designing
the process itself, should be aware of their intended goal in allowing consortia to
be created. And control agencies and auctioneers should know, in their turn,
that although allowed by public notice, this kind of process may give rise to
suspicious patterns.
b) Subcontracting
Similarly, subcontracting can be allowed in government procurements. It is a
mechanism by which the winning bidder transfers part of a work or service to be
carried out by a third party. In certain situations, bidders may take advantage of
subcontracting to implement anticompetitive agreements, as in the case of
companies that suppress their bids or cover other bids to be rewarded with a
subcontract. Thus, subcontracting collaborating companies allows for the
exceptionally high profits – consequence of the reduction of competition
caused by the agreement signed by bidders – to be divided amongst cartel
members.
Once again, this is not to say that subcontracting is always and necessarily the
result of an agreement amongst bidders. However, the potential risks of
subcontracting, regarding possible collusive strategies available to bidding
39Administrative Proceeding 08700.004617/2013-41. §100 of the vote of the Rapporteur of the
case, Commissioner João Paulo Resende.
45companies, should be analysed in the context of investigations about collusion
in government procurements.
THE AIRMAIL CARTEL CASE
(Administrative Proceeding 08012.010362/2007-66)
CASE SUMMARY
The Administrative Proceeding was launched in 2007 based on a Complaint by
the Federal Prosecution Services of the Federal District, requiring an investigation
into an alleged cartel in a procurement carried out by Correios, the Brazilian
postal service, to hire airmail services.
The case was tried in 2014 by the Tribunal of CADE, which found all investigated
parties guilty and imposed fines.
SUBCONTRACTING
Four days prior to the date for submitting proposals, the two investigated
companies signed a “Subcontracting Commitment”, according to which the
company that won any procurement lot would subcontract the other to provide
50% of the respective services. The unlawfulness and anticompetitive nature of
the referred subcontracting is evident, since it was prior to the procurement and
aimed at maintaining a certain previously-set allocation.
46FIGURE 640
II.4. Evidence of collusion in government procurements
Besides the market characteristics that facilitate cartel formation which were
mentioned in item II.1., there is also evidence that may serve to call the attention
of authorities and individuals in charge of procurement processes and
acquisition procedures for the possibility of collusion. Such evidence differs from
one procurement to another and are particularly linked to cases which CADE is
responsible for investigating, as exemplified below:
(I) Evidence at the stage of proposal submission:
40Figure 6 is a piece of evidence attached to the public version of the Administrative Proceeding,
page 2294. It is an excerpt of the subcontracting agreement regarding the subject matter.
47• Number of submitted proposals substantially lower than the usual or
expected.
• Unexpected withdrawal of some companies from the procurement
process, without a reasonable justification, or unexpected decrease in the
number of bidders in the procurement process.
• Submission of proposals by agents that clearly would not be able to win
the contract (e.g. common errors, above the reference price) or by
companies that continue to submit proposals despite being repeatedly
unsuccessful.
• A bidder presents several proposals or submits a proposal on their behalf
and on behalf of other competing companies.
• Regular competing bidders do not submit proposals when they would be
expected to do so, continuing to compete in other processes.
• Companies enter into a consortium, although they are clearly able to
submit individual proposals.
• Two or more proposals:
o Have identical price values (particularly in the case of sealed
proposals).
o Have similar wording and formatting, similar or identical errors
(typing, grammatical, and spelling errors or mathematical
calculations).
o Are sent from the same address, email, or fax or have postage
stamps with sequential numbers and/or that were sent from the
same post office.
o When submitted through electronic means, were created or
edited by the same supplier.
o Have similar letterhead paper, forms, or contact details.
(II) Evidence in the statements of bidders:
• Justification of proposed prices referring to “price suggested by the
market,” “standard market price”, or “price list of the market”.
• Express reference to proposals submitted by competitors or to the
existence of some type of agreement.
• Reference to the prerogative of a company to deal within a territory or
with a specific customer.
48• Declarations of business associations with detailed reference to proposals.
• Unions and business associations acting before courts or governmental
agencies to prevent the participation of companies by mentioning the
inadequacy of a company or proposals with impracticable prices.
(III) Evidence related to the behaviour of bidders during/at a procurement
process and in the business conditions of proposals:
• Winning bidders subcontract competitors who have lost a contract,
withdrawn from the process or refused to submit proposals, and/or
regularly hire the same competitor.
• In a set of procurement processes, suppliers usually win the same or similar
amounts of contracts.
• There is an odd and unreasonable price margin between the winning
proposal and the others.
• A company requests procurement documents for itself and one or more
competitors or a company submits a proposal along one or more
competitors. The value of proposals significantly decreases when a new
bidder enters into the procurement process; or, on the contrary, it
significantly increases without bidders or costs changing.
(IV) Evidence related to the outcome of the procurement process:
• There is a rotation pattern of contract winners related to procurement lots
and geographic distribution.
• The same company always wins the contracts awarded by a specific
government body and others keep participating even though they
always lose.
• A great variation in the prices offered in procurements for similar products
or services. Disclaimer: one needs to be sure the contracts are
comparable in terms of quantity, product, and timeframe.
In the face of evidence that indicate a cartel in government procurements, the
government procurement official must report it to CADE by means of a reasoned
complaint or the Clique-Denúncia, the channel available at CADE’s website for
anyone to report a violation. Once CADE has knowledge of the case, an
administrative investigation into it will be launched.
49PART III – PREVENTING CARTELS IN PROCUREMENTS
III.1. Contributions of government procurement officials to the fight
against cartels
CADE’s experience shows that the design of pro-competitive notices must be
based on a principle to elaborate notice rules that simultaneously: (i) diminish the
predictability of the main procurement baselines (such as reference price,
purchased quantity, lot division, technical qualification criteria, etc.); and, thus,
(ii) introduce destabilising elements into markets where there is a greater
propensity of cartel activity.
Such principle should not be understood as an insult to the stability of the rules
governing government procurements or to legal certainty, which are aimed at
ensuring predictability for economic agents, an essential requirement for
efficient and effective investments.
Thus, government procurement officials must pay close attention to the items
presented below from the beginning of the drafting of a notice in order to reduce
the risks associated with cartels in procurement and detect potential
anticompetitive conduct amongst bidders during the process.
III.2. What measures can be adopted to mitigate the risk of having a
cartel in procurements41
Considering all aspects that have already been mentioned, a brief checklist is
presented below with measures that can be adopted to prevent and reduce
the risk of collusion in government procurements:
(I) General recommendations:
• Request a Non-Collusive Bidding Certificate (Declaração de Elaboração
Independente de Proposta), under the terms of Regulation no. 2, 16 Sep
2009, by the Ministry of Planning, Budget, and Management. This
41See CADE’s contributions in Medidas para estimular o ambiente concorrencial dos processos
licitatórios. Available at: <http://www.cade.gov.br/acesso-a-informacao/publicacoes-
institucionais/contribuicoes-cade-ppi.pdf/view>.
50document is intended as a means to require that bidders guarantee,
through a document signed by their legal representatives, that their
commercial proposal and bids have been prepared without sharing any
commercial sensitive information with a competing company.
• Prohibit the disclosure of the reserve price/reference price, in accordance
with the terms of Law 12462, 4 Aug 2011, the Differential Procurement
Regime Law (Regime Diferenciado de Contratações).
• Review the relevance of adopting concurrent auctions – in case of more
than one concession related to a similar object – in order to prevent
market division (a strategy facilitated by sequential auctions).
• Plan concurrent auctions for complimentary projects – whether within the
same auction or with projects that have already been included in
previous procurements – in order to enable the creation of situations of
super cumulative valuation in auctions, attracting both companies that
are already active in the market and possible entrants. Consider the
possibility of using different auction designs, in the manner of the “mixed
auction model” (which combines open and closed formats) established
in the Differential Procurement Regime Law, according to att. 23 and 24
of Executive Order 7581, 11 Oct 2011.
• Ensure that clarifications related to the notice – provided to interested
parties in the phase prior to the submission of proposals – are offered in a
virtual environment, to prevent the identification of companies.
• Avoid opportunities for representatives of any interested companies to
meet in person, both in the internal and external phases (that is, the
procedures conducted before and after a notice is issued).
(II) Recommendations for designing public notices:
• Consortia: consider adopting criteria that stimulate competition,
encourage the participation of entrants and prevent consortia from being
used as a way to “strategically reduce demand” (which is harmful for
asset valuation, from the point of view of the requesting party).
51• Subcontracting: establish criteria for the monitoring and registration of
subcontracted companies, making registration mandatory, to prevent
subcontracting being used to carry out illegal agreements and reward
companies that fail to propose effective bids in the expectation of being
subcontracted later. Create incentives for entrants related to the scoring
criteria for the technical evaluation of proposals.
Establish different requirements for performance bonds in order to encourage
competition in auctions. In Brazil, these bonds are managed and issued by
the government-owned companies ABGF and FGIE.
(III) Recommendations for during the procurement process:
• Use a specific computerised system to carry out the auction, which
considers the specificities of its rules42, to ensure there is:
o A testing environment to emulate the auction.
o Secrecy regarding participants and the bids offered.
• Avoid in-person stages, in order to prevent representatives of participating
companies from meeting during the auction.
(IV) Recommendations on the specificities of each market and procurement
contract:
• Each market has specificities, regulations, and needs that can differently
affect procurement design. As an example, the regulatory, technical,
quality, safety, and even competition needs during the concession period
must be balanced with the need for stimulating competition in the
procurement process itself, in order to achieve an ideal balance between
the design of the concession contract and the public notice.
• Having a database – whether kept by the requesting bodies or other
authorities – that unifies significant procurement information is essential for
effectively fighting cartels in government procurements. This is because
the effective monitoring of procurement procedures can have a
deterrent effect, in addition to facilitating the detection of cartels.
42In this regard, see the experience of ANEEL, the Brazilian Electricity Regulatory Agency.
52PART IV – CRIMES ASSOCIATED WITH CARTELS IN PROCUREMENTS
IV.1. Cartel and fraud in procurements
Not rarely, fraud and cartels in government procurements are handled as a
single thing – synonyms for the same illegal practice. However, as briefly
explained on item I.2., although similar in several situations, such practices regard
different legal concepts.
Thus, it is important to properly recognise the legal parameters of each one and
convergent and divergent aspects between them since this results in different
and significant outcomes, such as which competent authority is in charge of
investigating and trying a case and which type of penalty is applicable in each
case. Fraud in government procurements is set forth in Article 46 of Law
8443/1992, the Federal Court of Accounts Law and Article 93 of Law 8666/1993
(the Procurement Law):
Art. 46. Once fraud in a procurement process is confirmed,
the Court must disqualify the bidder from federal
government procurements for up to five years.
Art. 93. Impede, disturb or defraud any procurement
process:
Penalty – 6 months to 2 years’ imprisonment, and a fine.
The Procurement Law provides for a penalty ranging from six months to two
years’ imprisonment and a fine to anyone convicted for defrauding any
procurement process. Fraud occurs when there is, during a procurement
process, any misleading, deceitful action, carried out in bad faith, with the
purpose of harming or deluding, or of preventing the fulfilment of a duty provided
by law or by the notice of the respective procurement process.
It should be noted that in all types of fraud (whether it is related to the forgery of
a mandatory document, or the delivery of a good instead of another, etc.), any
fraudulent conduct in a procurement process will always endanger the fairness
53and safety of government enterprises and procedures, which are protected by
the Procurement Law.
It is important to emphasise that this Law defines several types of fraudulent
behaviour. Amongst which there are those that endanger, simultaneously, the
integrity of administrative practices and the competitive nature of government
procurements, e.g. fraud conducted through arrangements or agreements
(cartels), which is specifically provided for in Article 90 of this Law.
Therefore, the Prosecution Services, who are responsible for ensuring the
effective observance of Government Authorities and defending the legal order,
in addition to investigating, pursuing, and prosecuting any agent (public or
private) whose conduct falls within the definitions of fraud established in Law
8666/1993, either in its most general form (article 93) or in the specific form of
fraud related to the competitive nature of a procurement process (article 90).
After the Judicial Branch assesses the reports, granting the right to defence, the
corresponding criminal penalties may be imposed on any fraudulent agents. The
Brazilian Court of Accounts (TCU) also has jurisdiction, in the administrative
domain, to investigate and punish fraudulent conduct, according to the Brazilian
Court of Accounts Law, effectively declaring the bidder ineligible.
As a deceitful practice against the Government, cartels in procurements are, at
the same time, a type of fraud subject to the aforementioned criminal penalties
and an economic crime, thus, CADE has jurisdiction to investigate and punish
such conduct. Some cases in which cartels and fraud may be confused are listed
below:
(I) Companies participating in a procurement with common partners that are
part of the same corporate group: in theory, there is no antitrust violation (cartel),
but a potential fraud of the competitive nature of the procurement process;
(II) Companies with common partners that are not clearly from the same
corporate group: it may involve both an antitrust violation and fraud in a
procurement process, when the close relationship between bidders may
indicate the existence of a cartel and should therefore be assessed together with
the rest of the evidence; or
54(III) Companies with a kinship or relationship between partners: can be
considered both an antitrust violation, and fraud in a procurement process, since
the relationship between partners is only a circumstantial piece of evidence of a
close relationship between bidders, which must be assessed together with the
rest of the evidence.
Although there is an apparent misunderstanding, the main issue is recognising
two different situations: (i) competing economic agents that start acting in
partnership in procurements – a cartel; versus (ii) economic agents that have
never competed (because they share common partners, shell companies, straw
parties, etc.) and start participating in procurement processes as if they were
bidders – fraud. In addition, there are some ways to defraud procurements that,
besides not involving agreements between competitors, can be made
unilaterally, such as the provision of misleading information by the winning
company.
In the two last cases of fraud aforementioned, that is, fraud between different
agents that do not really compete with each other, and fraud that did not even
involve an agreement between companies, we are not facing a cartel in a
procurement process and, therefore, CADE does not have jurisdiction to try these
cases; the authorities with jurisdiction are the Prosecution Services and the
Brazilian Court of Accounts. Therefore, even though fraud and cartels are similar,
they have important differences, and to each corresponds different applicable
rules and competent bodies responsible for investigating and prosecuting the
cases related to them.
55Fraud in government procurements as per the terms of Law 8666/1993
and Law 8443/1992
Law 8666/1993
Law 8443/1992 (the Procurement Law)
(the Brazilian Court of Accounts Law)
Art. 93. Impede, disturb, or defraud any
Art. 41. To ensure efficient monitoring and
procurement process:
in vestigation of accounts, the Court is to audit conducts
carried out by those under its jurisdiction that result in
Penalty – six months to two years’ imprisonment,
revenue or expense, and must, for this purpose,
and a fine.
particularly:
I – monitor, (…)
b) government procurement notices, contracts,
including administrative ones, and covenants,
agreements, arrangements, or other similar
instruments, as well as the conducts referred to in
Ar ticle 38 of this Law;
Prosecution Services and Police Forces
Ar t. 46. Once fraud is detected, the Court must declare
As far as crimes are concerned, the Police forces
the fraudulent bidder ineligible to participate in
pr ocurement processes held by the Federal and Prosecution Services are responsible for
Government for up to five years. investigating and prosecuting cartels in the
Art. 47. In audits, in case of embezzlement, criminal domain.
misappropriation of funds, or other irregularity that
results in losses to the Treasury, the Court is to
immediately order the proceeding to become a case of
special rendering of accounts, with the exception of the
situations provided for in Article 93 of this Law.
Judicial Branch
If the Prosecution Services understand a crime
has been committed, they report it to the
judiciary, which will launch a criminal
Brazilian Federal Court of Accounts (TCU)
proceeding that will be prosecuted and tried by
Should TCU, in its duty of supervising and auditing
a judge with jurisdiction over the case.
notices of procurement processes, in addition to
contracts and covenants, detect fraud in a procurement
process, the Court has jurisdiction to declare the
fraudulent bidder ineligible to participate in other
procurement processes for up to five years, as well as to
conduct a special rendering of accounts, in the event of
losses to the Treasury.
56IV.2. Cartel in procurements and corruption
Cartels in government procurement have several specificities that make the
subject more complex. One of them is particularly challenging: the potential
coexistence, in government procurements, of cartels and corruption (amongst
cartelists and government officials).
Their coexistence and interrelation can take different forms. One possible way is,
for instance, when a government official intends to gain undue advantage and
contacts a company or a group of companies to offer guidance related to a
procurement. On the other hand, it is also possible that members of a cartel,
aiming to ensure the success of their illegal agreement, engage in corrupt
actions to make the government official in charge of the process turn a blind eye
or even collaborate with the agreement.
Thus, it is notable that, in the context of government procurements, the
coexistence of these illegal conducts is somewhat usual and can strengthen one
another, creating a type of vicious cycle that further aggravates the already
severe losses caused by each conduct alone. However, it is necessary to
understand that even if corruption and collusion are interconnected, they are
actually separate illegal practices, i.e. one is not a prerequisite for the existence
of the other, and may, in this sense, exist completely independently.
As a consequence, cartels in government procurements and corrupt conducts
are violations of different natures and are separately addressed by the Brazilian
legal system. Thus, it is crucial to properly recognise what characterises one and
the other and the resulting effects, such as the type of penalty applicable in
each case, which bodies investigate the case and impose such penalties, etc.
Cartels in government procurements, as it has already been explained, are
agreements amongst bidders aimed at restricting or neutralise competition in the
procurement process. Ultimately, this is the most serious type of economic crime,
in which competitors are driven by the fact they have a common goal, while
consumers (and the Government itself, in the case of procurements) suffer the
negative effects.
The power to prevent and deter economic crimes, including cartels, falls on the
Administrative Council for Economic Defense (CADE), which, under the terms of
57Law 12529/2011, is the agency with jurisdiction to impose administrative penalties
for the anticompetitive conducts defined in Article 36 of the Procurement Law,
such as cartels in government procurements.
On the other hand, corruption is a crime against the Government, set forth in the
Brazilian Criminal Code, that can be committed by a civil servant (passive
corruption – Article 317) or a private individual (active corruption – Article 333),
with a penalty of 2 to 12 years’ imprisonment and a fine applicable in both cases.
In this sense, the Anticorruption Law (Federal Law 12846/2013) established an
administrative interface that complements the performance of CADE and the
Prosecution Services, aimed at making companies strictly liable – in the
administrative and civil domains – for conducts harmful to the Government.
According to the Anticorruption Law, conducts that are harmful to the
Government are (amongst others provided for in Article 5):
(I) promising, offering, or giving, directly or indirectly, undue advantages to
government officials or to third parties related to them – that is, active corruption;
(II) frustrating or defrauding, by means of arrangement, agreement, or any other
way, the competitive nature of government procurement processes – that is,
cartels in government procurements.
Passive corruption involves requesting or receiving undue advantages, or
accepting a promise of advantages for oneself or for others, directly or indirectly,
even if not in office or before taking office, but related to an official position.
Active corruption, on the other hand, involves offering or promising undue
advantages to civil servants to have them do, omit to do, or delay performing
their duties related to their position.
Criminally prosecuting agents involved in passive or active corruption is a duty of
the Prosecution Services, which must take the case to the Judicial Branch,
without prejudice to actions taken by administrative bodies responsible for
internal and external controls, such as courts of accounts, comptrollers’ offices,
boards of ethics, etc.
If cartels in government procurements and corruption happen at the same time,
it is all the more important that the defence of competition and the fight against
58corruption also be carried out simultaneously, which demands all competent
authorities take action together.
A good example of joint action is the Memorandum of Understanding signed
between the Prosecution Services of the State of São Paulo (MPF/SP) and CADE,
aimed at fighting cartels and working especially on leniency agreement
negotiations. As the signing of leniency agreements at the administrative level
also offers advantages at the criminal level, it is important that the antitrust
authority and the Prosecution Services have an understanding in this matter.
Therefore, cartels in government procurements and corruption, despite being
violations of a different nature and which endanger different legal interests, they
can be dealt with at the same time, and thus require complementary actions by
the competent authorities. The interface between the actions to be taken by the
competent authorities are exemplified and summarised in the table below. It is
important to emphasize that the interactions between these domains happen in
a coordinated manner (because fighting corruption falls outside the jurisdiction
of CADE, even though the practice is closely linked to cartels).
CADE Office of the Comptroller Prosecution
General (CGU) Services and Police
Competition Law (cartel)
Forces
Anticorruption Law
(corruption) Crimes (e.g. cartel,
corruption, money
laundry, etc.)
Penalties Administrative (up to 20% of gross Administrative (up to 20% Imprisonment +
revenue) + prohibition to contract with of gross revenue) + community service
the government, if applicable prohibition to contract + fines
with the government, if
applicable
Type of Leniency Cease and Desist Leniency Agreement – Plea agreements –
agreement Agreement Agreement Law 12846/2013 Law 12850/2013
(CADE) – Law (CADE) – Law and others
12529/2011 and 12529/2011 and
the Statutes of the Statutes of
CADE CADE
Beneficiary Companies and Companies and Companies (only applies Individuals (there is
individuals (only individuals (applies to the 1st applicant) usually no
apples to the 1st to the 2nd and any requirements
applicant)
59following related to the order
applicants) of application)
Jurisdiction Signed by the Approved by - Highest authority of Approved by the
General CADE’s Tribunal, each body or judge at the
Superintendence with no government agency request of the Chief
of CADE, in interference from of Police,
- At the federal level:
consultation with the Prosecution Prosecution
CGU, the Office of the
the Prosecution Services Service, or
Attorney General (AGU),
Services collaborator
Prosecution Services
- Brazilian Court of
Accounts (TCU) has
jurisdiction to monitor
and review the
agreements (not a
consensus)
Administrative Complete Fine reduction by Fine reduction (up to 2/3) - Acquittal
and/or immunity or up to 50% (the and immunity or
- Reduction of the
criminal partial of Statutes of CADE) mitigation of the
imprisonment
benefits administrative and authorisation prohibition to contract
sentence (up to
and criminal to contract with the Government
2/3)
penalties (1 to
2/3) and - Alternative
authorisation to sentences instead
contract of imprisonment
Civil benefits No automatic civil No automatic civil No automatic civil No automatic civil
benefits granted. benefits granted. benefits granted. benefits granted.
Changes may be
made to the
legislation on joint
and several
liabilities.
Source: ATHAYDE, Amanda. Manual dos Acordos de Leniência no Brasil: teoria e
prática (2019).
60